I.


It is no foolish desire to make a vain display of citations, that induces
us, at the beginning of this essay, intended to point out the results of
the application of a new method to the study of Political Economy, to
invoke the authority of a poet and moralist, of a jurisconsult and of a
philosopher. The writer finds in the words just quoted the loftiest
expression of the thought which dictates these lines, viz.: that the
impartial researches of history, a profound feeling of man's moral and
material wants, and the light of philosophy, should govern in the teaching
of a science, the object of which is to show us how those things which are
intended to satisfy our wants are produced and distributed among the
several classes or individuals of a nation; how they are exchanged one
against another, and how they are consumed.

The nineteenth century affords us something more than the admirable
spectacle of the rapid and fertile development of mechanical power and
natural forces. This is but one of the aspects, we might even say but one
of the results, of the general progress of the human mind. The renovation
of moral and intellectual studies has served as a starting point for the
application to facts of the conquests of thought. Science has preceded
art.

In the foremost rank of the studies just referred to is _philosophy_,
which initiates us into the knowledge of human nature, the basis of right,
and which translates its legitimate aspirations into a language which we
can understand; _history_, that _prophetess_ of the truth, as one of the
ancients called it, which places before us the faithful picture of times
past, not by simply putting together a skeleton of facts, but by following
the living progress of events and the organic development of institutions.
Such, at least, has been the work of those noble minds who have
consecrated their energies to the resuscitation of ages past, in their
true shape, and such is the service for which we are indebted to them for
the successful accomplishment of the reformation of historical studies,
which they attempted with such rare devotion and such marvelous sagacity.

This renovation of history has exerted the most fertile influence in the
region of philosophy, in that of law, and we believe that it will prove no
less useful in that of Political Economy. It has served to put us on our
guard against being easily misled by _a priori_ notions.

By exhibiting to us the results of the life and of the experience of
centuries, by teaching us by what steps the human mind has risen to its
present eminence, and what the education given it in the past has been, it
has enabled us to ascend from phenomena to the principles which preside
over them; from facts to the law; and it has substituted for arbitrary
assumptions and purely ideal systems, the slow but progressive work of the
genius of nations. Not that it turns a deaf ear to the exalted lessons of
philosophy, nor that it denies the _eternal relations resulting from the
nature of things_. Far from it. On the contrary, it supplies a solid basis
to intellectual investigations, and, so to speak, an answer for all the
moral sciences, to this saying of Roederer: "Politics is a field which has
been traversed thus far only in a balloon; it is time to put foot on solid
ground."

Neither does history, as thus understood, confine itself to mere
description; it also assumes the office of judge. While it pulls down much
that passion and inaccuracy have reared, and thus restores respect for the
past, it does not turn that past into a fetish. It looks it boldly in the
face and questions it, instead of prostrating itself before it and
worshipping it with downcast eyes. Thus, by plainly showing us the many
bonds which tie us to it, it escapes at once both the rashness of
impatience and the wearisomeness of routine.

The impartiality it inculcates is not indifference; and there is no danger
that the justice it metes out to past ages shall degenerate into a vain
scepticism or a convenient optimism.

The study of history, thus understood, has another advantage; it accustoms
us to those patient and disinterested investigations, to those lengthy
labors, the positive result of which at first escapes us for a time, only
to burst on our eyes, with so much more brilliancy, when rigorous research
has succeeded in discovering it. It frees us from the deadly constraint of
immediate utility.

There is nothing more fatal to science than the feverish impatience for
results which obtains only too much in our own days, and which induces
people to run after him who is in the greatest hurry, and which leads to
hasty conclusions.

"Research undertaken from a disinterested love of science," says the
learned Hugo, one of the masters of the historical school of law in
Germany,(5) "that research which at first promises no other advantage but
truth and the culture of the mind, is precisely that which brings us the
richest rewards. Would we not be behind, in all the sciences, if we had
clung only to those principles, the utility of which in practice was
already known? Do we not, to-day, from many a discovery, reap advantages
of which its author never dreamed?"

Doubtless this tendency, unless restrained by other demands, is not exempt
from danger. We may be carried away by the attraction peculiar to these
noble studies, withdraw into antiquity and fall into a species of
historical mysticism which ends in the affirmation, that whatever has been
is true, absolutely, and which, instead of confining itself to the
explanation of transitory phenomena, invests them with all the dignity of
principles. We shall endeavor to avoid the peril pointed out by
Mallebranche. "Learned men study rather to acquire a chimerical greatness
in the imagination of other men, than to acquire greater breadth and
strength of mind themselves. They make their heads a kind of store-room,
into which they gather, without order or discrimination, everything which
has a look of erudition,--I mean to say everything which may seem rare or
extraordinary and excite the wonder of other people. They glory in getting
together, in this archæological museum, antiques with nothing that is rich
or solid about them, and the price of which depends on nothing but fancy,
chance or passion."

A display of erudition may obscure the truth, and bury it under its
weight, instead of bringing it out into relief. By concentrating the mind
on the material vestiges of the past, it may withdraw it from the
intellectual movement of the present, and give us a race of scholars, of
great merit, doubtless, but who move about like strangers among their
contemporaries.

Without a sense for the practical, and without ideas of an elevated
nature, a person may, indeed, be a man of erudition--he cannot be a
historian. As the proverb says, the forest cannot be seen, for the trees.
That this noble study may bear its best and most useful fruit; that is,
that it should preserve us against ambitious _formulas_ and destructive
chimeras, we must pursue another way.

"The world," says Montaigne, "is incapable of curing itself. It is so
impatient of what burthens it, that it thinks only of how it shall rid
itself of it, without inquiring at what price. A thousand examples show us
that it cures itself ordinarily at its own cost. The getting rid of the
present evil is not cure, unless there be a general amendment of
condition. Good does not immediately succeed evil. One evil, and a worse,
may follow another, like Cæsar's assassins, who brought the republic to
such a pass, that they had reason to repent the meddling with it." Such,
too frequently, is the lot of those who, abandoning themselves to their
imagination, and without consulting the past, mix together promises of
liberty and the despotism of Utopias which they would impose on nations
under pretext of enfranchising them. Despising the work of the ages, they
think they can build upon a soil shaken by destruction and crumbled, until
it may be likened to moving sand.

Contempt for the past is associated with a passion for reform. Men think
of destroying that which should only be transformed. They condemn
everything that has been, unconditionally, and launch out towards a new
future. The suffering which has been gone through irritates and troubles
the mind. The work of pulling down is so easy, it is supposed that the
work of building up is equally so. Hence systems rise, as if the world
were to begin anew. The pride of liberty and of human action becomes the
principle of science; and, like all new principles, it pretends to
exclusive and absolute dominion. Rationalism governs; abstract philosophy
ignores the traditions and the requirements of the life of nations; and
finds now in it, as in geometry, nothing but principles and deductions.
The memory of recent oppression causes us to act as Tarquin did, and to
level down the higher classes instead of elevating the inferior. Liberty
and equality then govern by their negative side, instead of exercising the
positive and beneficent influence they should have, to develop all forces
to their utmost, to ennoble the mind, to give more elasticity to the soul
and greater vigor to thought, to give birth to those varied forms and to
that moral energy, which should bring us nearer to final equality in the
bosom of God.(6)

We forget that no one is born _free_, and that every one ought to endeavor
to become so,


    Feindlich ist des Mannes Streben
    Mit zermalmender Gewalt
    Geht der Wilde durch des Leben
    Ohne Rast und Aufenthalt,

    --_Schiller_.


and make himself worthy of liberty, by the exercise of manly virtue!
Because the form has been changed, we believe that we have changed human
nature.

It is easy to understand, why, where these ideas prevail, the study of the
past should be neglected and despised. Efforts are made to avoid it. Why,
it is asked, revive memories of oppression and misery? The old world is
wrecked. It is annihilated. Peace to its ashes! Or else, after it has been
destroyed, it is sought for again; and, under pretext of eradicating the
evils existing in it, an attack is made on the eternal basis on which
human society rests, on the laws not made by man, and which it is not
given to man to change. The world becomes one vast laboratory, in which
the rashest experiments are multiplied in number, in which mankind is but
clay in the hands of the potter which every pretended "thinker" may mould
at will, by giving him the false appearances of independence and of an
emancipated being.

And, indeed, if the will of man be all-powerful, if states are to be
distinguished from one another only by their boundaries, if everything may
be changed like the scenery in a play by a flourish of the magic wand of a
system, if man may arbitrarily make the right, if nations can be put
through evolutions like a regiment of troops; what a field would the world
present for attempts at the realization of the wildest dreams, and what a
temptation would be offered to take possession, by main force, of the
government of human affairs, to destroy the rights of property and the
rights of capital, to gratify ardent longings without trouble, and provide
the much coveted means of enjoyment. The Titans have tried to scale the
heavens, and have fallen into the most degrading materialism. Purely
speculative dogmatism sinks into materialism.

All is changed, both men and things. Yet we hear the same old style of
declamation. There are those who wish to plough up the soil which the
harrow of the revolution went over yesterday; and they believe they are
marching in the way of progress. They do not see that they have mistaken
their age, and that the bold attempts of the past have now come to possess
a directly opposite meaning. Without stopping to inquire to what side the
new world inclines, they repeat the same words, and swear _in verba
magistri_, and go the road of destruction, believing themselves to be
creating the world anew!

Nothing is more natural than that these excesses should produce other
excesses, in a contrary direction. Moved by hatred or fear of
revolutionary absolutism, nations seek an asylum in governmental
absolutism, or they retrograde towards the middle ages, and consider the
mutual bond of protection and dependence of that period as the ideal and
the realization of true liberty. History is no longer the organic
development of social life, and man, like a soldier that thoughtlessly and
capriciously has gone beyond his place of supplies, is obliged to retrace
his steps. The reaction is clearly defined. The past is opposed to the
present, not as a lesson to be turned to advantage, but as a model which
must be hastily accepted; and men become revolutionary in a backward
direction.

However, history, rigorously studied, knows neither these complaisances
nor these weaknesses. It does not descend to the apotheosis of a past
which cannot return again. The real historical spirit consists in rightly
discerning what belongs to each epoch. Its object is, by no means, to call
back the dead to life, but to explain why and how they lived. In harmony
with a healthy philosophy, it assigns a limit to the vagaries of arbitrary
will, beyond which the latter cannot go. It unceasingly calls us back,
from the heights of abstraction, to positive facts and things.

In the creation of systems, only one thing was wont to be forgotten, men,
who were treated, in them, like so many ciphers; for intellectual
despotism has this in common with all despotic authority. History teaches
us that we can reach nothing great or lasting, but by addressing ourselves
to the soul. If the soul decays, there can be no longer great thoughts or
great actions. Society lives by the spirit which inhabits it. It may, for
an instant, submit to the empire of force, but, in the long run, it
hearkens only to the voice of justice. It was thus that the greatest
revolution which history records, that of Christianity, was accomplished.
It addressed itself only to the soul; but by changing the hearts of men,
it transformed society entirely.

The violent struggle between an imperious dogmatism and an unintelligent
and mistaken attempt at a retrogressive movement is resolved into a higher
view, which permits the union of conservatism and progress. Violent
attempts and rash endeavors made, threatened to bring contempt on the
noblest teachings of philosophy, and to make them repulsive to man; and,
on the other hand, a blind respect for the institutions consecrated by
history threatened to stifle all examination and all freedom of judgment.

But a healthier doctrine has permitted us to understand, that we are
continuing the work of preceding generations; that we are developing the
germs which they successively sowed; that we are perfecting that which
they had only sketched, and that we are letting drop that which has no
support in the social condition of man. Every thing is connected; each
thing is linked to every other; nothing is repeated. The hopes of sudden
and total renovation, based on absolute formulas, vanish before the touch
of this solid study. This shows us how firm and unshaken are those reforms
which have begun by taking hold of the minds of men, the precise spirit of
which had penetrated into the souls of whole nations before they had
manifested themselves in facts.

Law and Economy constitute a part of the life of nations in the same way
that language and customs do. The power of history in no way contradicts
the supremacy of reason.




II.


These two tendencies, the rationalistic and the historical, are everywhere
found face to face. They carry on an eternal warfare, which is renewed in
every age, under new names and new forms. Accomplished facts and
renovating thought divide the world between them. They at one time
moderate its speed, and at others, spur it on its way. But these two
forces, instead of compromising the destinies of humanity by their
opposing action, maintain and balance them, as the contrary impulses given
by the hand of the Great Architect has peopled the universe with worlds
which gravitate in space.

Victor Cousin, a very competent authority on the subject, has said that
the history of philosophy is the torch of philosophy itself. The
remarkable works which have enriched it in this direction are well known.
History, on its side, is enlightened by philosophy. Thus, it teaches us
not to despise facts, but at the same time not to be slaves to precedent.
It does equal justice to the incredulous and to the fanatic, to too supple
practitioners and to intractable theorizers.

We may doubtless say with Henri Klimrath, who, in connection with a few
others, had undertaken the work of the restoration of historical study in
its application to French law, that there is an absolute, true, beautiful,
good and just, the _ratio recta summi Jovis_,(7) the supreme reason
founded in the nature of things.(8) The eternal truths taught by
philosophy constitute the higher law, a law which dates not from the day
on which it was reduced to writing, but from the day of its birth; and it
was born with the divine intelligence itself. "_Qui non tum denique
incipit lex esse, cum scripta est, sed tum cum orta est. Orta autem simul
est cum mente divina._"(9) And Troplong rightly adds: "There are rules
anterior to all positive laws. I cannot grant that the action of
conscience and the idea of right are the work of the legislator. It is not
law that made the family, property, liberty, equality, the idea of good
and evil. It may, indeed, give organization to all these things, but in
doing so, it is only working on the foundation which nature has laid, and
it is perfect in proportion as it comes nearer to the eternal, immutable
laws which the Creator has engraved on our hearts. What changes is not the
eternal law, the revelation of which comes to man incessantly and by a
necessary action, but the form in which humanity clothes it, the
institutions which man builds on its immutable foundation."(10)

We therefore believe in the law of nature, and regret that our opinion is
not shared by Mr. Roscher, at least that he does not explicitly enough
express his faith in it, nor apply it broadly enough in the beautiful work
which we are happy to render accessible to the French public.(11) We
believe in it in its philosophical sense, and not simply in the juridical
sense attached to it by Ulpian. "Let us not," observes Portalis, "confound
the physical order of nature, common to all animated beings, with the
natural law which is peculiar to man. We call _natural law_, the
principles which govern man considered as a moral being, that is, as an
intelligent and free being, intended to live in the society of other
beings, intelligent and free like himself."(12) Ulpian's famous tripartite
division, of natural law, the law of nations, and the civil law, is proof,
from the meaning he attaches to them, either of a misunderstanding or of
the imperfect idea which the Stoics had conceived of the essence of
natural law. In vain Cujas exhausted all the resources of his noble
intellect to explain it.(13)

It is necessary to draw a distinction between physical law and the law
(_droit_) of intelligent beings. Doubtless the existence of men as well as
that of animals is limited by time. They both live and die; but the soul
escapes the necessities of material nature.

The moment there is question of _right_, intelligence governs, reason
comes into play, and the science of right and wrong is appealed to as a
guide. Hence the _natural_ law of the human species is not the physical
law which all creatures obey.

It was necessary for us to insist upon these principles. It was necessary
for us to show that there is a law independent of positive and local law,
a law which is not the expression of an arbitrary will, but an emanation
from the nature of things.(14)

Hence come the features in common which we meet with everywhere, and the
variable forms which develop law in harmony with the special conditions of
each civil society.

We must descend into the very depths of human nature to discover these
eternal and permanent laws; and if the mere effort of the mind should not
reach them directly, they might be discovered in the phenomena of the life
of nations. History affords us the counter-proof and confirmation of the
philosophical doctrine.

The development of society does not afford a mathematical expression of
these higher truths. It gives them a form which is unceasingly modified in
the written law. The person who discovers in them nothing but an absolute
rule, looks upon the changes as evidences of caprice and error. He alone
understands the revolutions of things who knows their cause and the
necessity which produces them.

Solon was right when he gave the Athenians not the most perfect laws, but
the best which they could bear.

It is not in the attempts contemporary with the infancy of society, or
nearly so, that we are to look for the complete realization of the
precepts of the natural law; for principles obey the rule laid down by
Aristotle. "The nature of each thing is precisely that which constitutes
its end; and when each being has attained its entire development, we say
that that is its own proper nature."(15)

The ideas of natural law are purified in proportion as society grows
enlightened and free; but the truth appears only successively in the
phases it passes through. It allows us to grasp one aspect of itself after
another, but does not surrender itself entirely, at any one moment, to the
investigations of the historian or the jurisconsult.

History and philosophy interpenetrate and complement one another.




III.


The two schools, that of philosophy and that of history have met in our
day, in the field of law. Who is there that does not remember the great
and noble contest carried on, about the beginning of this century, between
two descendants of Frenchmen who had sought a refuge in Germany, and who
united in their own persons, and in so marvelous a manner, the different
aptitudes of the country they owed their origin to, and of the land that
gave them birth,--between Thibaut and Savigny?

It would be difficult to find a scientific question of a higher character,
debated by champions more worthy to throw light upon it.

The _Code Napoléon_ had appeared. It had, to use Rossi's happy expression,
transferred into law the social revolution produced by the destruction of
privilege. It was the practical formula expressive of the conquests which
had been made.

The philosophy of the eighteenth century had previously inspired the
Prussian Code. And yet, it was on the question of codification that this
memorable controversy was carried on. The two principal combatants, while
manfully battling, the one against the other, continued to hold each other
in high esteem, and the profound study of law was developed in the midst
of the _melée_.

We cannot delay long on this subject, nor analyze the arguments advanced
by Thibaut(16) and Savigny.(17) What interests us at present is not so
much the question debated, as the intellectual movement to which it gave
birth. Savigny sustained the ancient law, Thibaut attacked it. Numerous
and distinguished jurisconsults ranged themselves on the one side and the
other. A new school grew up which, with the most brilliant success, made
law throw light on history and history on law.

The application of the historical method to the study of law was
productive of the most happy results.

Without acknowledging it to themselves, the chiefs of the contending
parties were each obeying a political impulse. Savigny was by his birth
and his tastes carried into the camp of conservatism; Thibaut, led by his
convictions, into the liberal ranks. Nevertheless, the natural elevation
of their genius preserved them from all exaggeration. The glorious
defender of tradition preserved a liberal spirit, and the ardent advocate
of reform desired no upheaval.

In what more nearly concerns the question with which we are now occupied,
Savigny--while he maintained that law was something contingent, human,
national; and while he brought out into relief the practical and exalted
character of its successive developments which introduced reform and
guarded against revolution--developments which, not confiding in the letter
of the written law, unceasingly feed the living and created law, that law
called in the energetic language of a great jurisconsult, a law _écrit es
coeurs des citoyens_--is far from denying the importance of a high and
healthy philosophy which directs man in the uninterrupted labor to which
he is called, in the sphere of jurisprudence.

Men can no more renounce law than language, the forms of which last they
have gradually modified in order to better translate their thoughts into
words. The legislator's task is the successive elaboration of obligatory
provisions. He will sometimes oppose and sometimes second the natural
progress of law; but, in doing so, it will ever be necessary for him to
ascend to the nature of things, and grasp their relations, if he would not
go astray in practice, or lose himself among the successive and partial
changes to which the illustrious Berlin professor would confine the
legitimate ambition of legislative power. To go beyond this, in an age
like ours, seemed to him to be a work of destruction. However, far from
denying the influence of thought, and therefore of philosophy, acting
within its sphere, Savigny invokes its fertile aid.

Thibaut, on the other hand, with more confidence in the powers of the
spirit of modern times, did not believe a good codification to be
impossible. His starting point had been a cry for national independence.
He well knew how much veneration was due those institutions which were the
slow and progressive work of national genius, and what was the power they
possessed. He wished, therefore, to reform, not to abolish them. He well
understood that the greatness of the _Code Napoléon_ itself, and the
respect which it inspired were due to the fact that its roots ran deep
into the soil of the past, even while the modern idea it contained shone
like a bright light in the world of things. Hence, without contesting the
value of history, he refused to acknowledge its right to exclusive
reign.(18)

The life and activity prevailing in the study of law, and the brilliant
successes that study has recently achieved, are due, in great part, to the
illustrious representatives of the historical school. We may add, here,
that the French historical school, which has so worthily inherited the
spirit of Montesquieu, has not achieved less in this direction than the
older German school. It has reconciled the opposing but not mutually
hostile, tendencies of Savigny and Thibaut. It has conscientiously
scrutinized facts to show their concatenation, and to allow their meaning
and bearing to be clearly grasped. A French jurisconsult, who is at the
same time our highest authority in the natural law, opened the way by his
excellent essays on the necessity of reforming the historical studies
applicable to law; on the influence of the legists on French
civilization(19) etc.; and by his prefaces, equal in value to whole works,
on hypothecation, sales, loans, partnership, charter-parties etc. He may
truly be said to have renewed the ancient and prolific alliance of history
and law.

Instead of pursuing a pure abstraction, this historical school has
confined itself to the knowledge of the life of man and the evolution of
society. It has applied to law, with what success is well known, the
principle which has regenerated the social sciences, philosophy, letters,
history, Political Economy,--sciences which are, so to speak, different
provinces of one intellectual empire, which interpenetrate one another
without being confounded one with another, between which no jealous
barrier should be raised, and between which reciprocity of exchange should
be encouraged by the suppression of factitious duties, which have existed
only too long.




IV.


We need not dwell any longer on the character of the historical method as
applied to law, nor on the services it has already rendered. On this
point, there can be no two opinions. And, if any one wonders that we
should speak of it at all, in a work on Political Economy, we can only say
to him, that we have done so to call his attention to an instructive
precedent, and for the further reason that the same method is peculiarly
well adapted to the study of Political Economy. Its advantages are the
same here, its tendencies the same, and the same motives exist to induce
us to use it here. In describing the successive phases of the question in
the case of law, we have performed an important part of the task we had
imposed upon ourselves, of vindicating the employment of the historical
method, in the sphere of Political Economy.

The study of history is the best and most powerful antidote against social
romances and ideal fancies. François Beaudouin was right when he said:
"_Cæca sine historia jurisprudentia_;" and we are very sure that, without
history as an element in it, Political Economy runs a great risk of
walking blindfold.

The human mind has need of being able to know where it is at any moment,
surrounded, as it is, by so many roads, running in so many different
directions. It ought to account to itself for its progress, its deviations
from the right path, and for its mistakes.(20) History alone can throw any
light on questions which are not simply intellectual curiosities, but
which, rather, are most deeply concerned with the vital interests of
society. It confirms the noble teachings of philosophy, by showing how our
life is made up of one unchanging tissue of relations, and how man, even
if he may vary their colors, and change their design, cannot renew their
texture.

It teaches us to admire nothing, and to despise nothing, beyond measure.
It enlightens us concerning questions of a very complicated nature.
Witnessing the evolutions of humanity, following the development of social
facts and theories, we better discern principles, and grow wary in
relation to the alchemists of thought, who imagine that society may be
made to undergo a transformation between the rising and the setting of the
sun.

As there is a natural law, so, too, there are certain principles of
Political Economy which emanate from philosophy, and may be reduced to one
supreme principle; that of liberty and responsibility. The domain of
Political Economy is the _labor_ of generations. But we reject with all
our strength, the materialistic doctrine which, inexplicably confusing
matters, endeavors to assimilate ideas so distinct as intelligence and
things; and which would descend so low as to employ the dynamometer to
measure the creative force of man and its results, and which sees only
figures where there is a living soul.

Man is an intelligent being, served by organs,(21) by _personal_ organs,
with which the Creator has endowed him, by giving him a body provided with
marvellous aptitudes, by _external_ organs which he finds in nature
subjected to his power. Man was created in the image of God, say the
Scriptures, and these words contain a deep meaning. He alone, of all
terrestrial beings, possesses a spark of divine intelligence. He alone has
been called to pursue the magnificent work of creation, by giving a new
face to a world to which he cannot add so much as an atom.

_Labor_ is nothing but the action of spirit on itself and on matter.(22)
Hence its dignity and grandeur. Hence, also, the difficulties in the way
of economic studies; since, to consider them only as concerned with
questions of material production, is to forget that the products of
industry are made for man, not man for industrial products; to ignore the
close relationship between their fruitful investigations and the whole
circle of the moral sciences; to debase them and to mutilate them.

From the moment that science concerns itself with man only, and the action
of the mind; from the moment that its end becomes not simply material
enjoyment, but moral elevation, the questions it discusses become indeed
more complex, but the answer, when found, is more prolific in results.
Wealth, then, is treated only as one of the forces of civilization. Other
interests than purely material ones occupy the first place. This
matter-of-fact philosophy which, according to Bacon's precept, seeks to
improve the conditions of life, bears in mind, that the most fruitful
source of material development lies in intellectual development. It humbly
recognizes that it is not the first-born of the family, and draws new
strength from this avowal. From the moment that it is the mind which
_produces_ and which governs the world, intellectual and moral perfection
become the cause and effect of material progress. "But seek ye first the
kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added
unto you."

The increase of production, then, appears an instrument of elevation in
the moral order.(23) It is energy of soul, intelligence and manly virtue
which constitute the chief source of the wealth of nations; which create
it, develop it, and preserve it. Wealth increases, declines, and
disappears with the increase, decline and disappearance of these noble
attributes of the soul.

Labor is the child of thought. Nothing happens in the external world which
was not first conceived in the mind. The hand is the servant of the
intellect; and its work is successful, beautiful or useful in proportion
to the activity and development of the intellect, and in proportion as the
just, the beautiful and the good exert their power over it.

Production is, therefore, not a material, but a spiritual, work. How,
then, can acts and their morality be separated? How not understand that
the market of labor has its own distinct laws, and that education, even
from a material stand-point, becomes the highest interest and the most
important duty of society, since on it depends the efficiency of labor?

From the time that, after a long series of years, the doctrine of
Christianity had permeated the law of the civilized world; from the time
that the teaching of Paul, that all men are children of one Father, took
form and body, and that the principle of the equality of all men before
their Maker, was supplemented by the doctrine and by the practice of that
equality before the laws, the thinking masses have endeavored to discover
the wherefore of their actions, and the why of their sufferings. They have
called the past to account, and inquired why they have obtained so limited
a share.

The people, therefore, think; and it is, therefore, a matter of importance
that they should think aright. It is of importance, that they should be
guarded against fallacious Utopian promises. Henceforth, there is no
security for the stability of the world but in the contentment of minds.
There is no rest for mankind, unless men will understand the conditions of
their destiny; unless, instead of running,


    "Toujours insatiable et jamais assouvis,"


after the intoxicating cup of material enjoyment--for wants not governed by
the intellect and the heart are infinite in number, and the gratification
of one gives birth to another--they submit to the law of sacrifice, and
give play to the noblest faculty with which the Creator has endowed us,
moral empire over self.

We shall meet on this road, hard of ascent, not only peace of soul, but
goods, more real and more numerous, than those with which the allurements
of error would dazzle our eyes. The greatest obstacles to be overcome are
not material ones, but moral difficulties. As Franklin says, in substance,
he that tells you you can succeed, in any way but by labor and economy, is
a quack.

But labor is more productive in proportion as it is more intelligent, as
hand and mind keep pace with each other, as good moral habits generate
order and voluntary discipline.

Economy is sacrifice, binding the present to the future, widening the
horizon of thought, inspiring foresight, lengthening the lever of human
activity, by providing it with new instruments.

Life ceases to be a worry about how the body shall be sustained, and the
material world becomes the shadow of the spiritual. The former is made to
serve the latter, and man's free effort lifts him into a higher region of
thought, and into a larger field of action. The more mind there is put
into a piece of work, says Channing, the more it is worth.

We, men of to-day, are lookers-on at a marvelous spectacle. Steam furrows
the earth. Industry has taken an immense start. Mechanical force bends the
most rebellious materials. Chemistry, physics and the natural sciences are
discovering a new world. But whence all this? What is the principle of
this new life? We answer: intellectual and moral progress. Mind has grown;
the soul has been expanded. God has permitted man to be free, and
furnished him with the means to be so.

Thus man, as Mignet has said, becomes that mighty creature to whom God has
given the earth for the vast theater of his action, the universe as the
inexhaustible object of his knowledge, the forces of nature for the
growing service of his wants, by allowing him, by ever increasing
information, to obtain an ever increasing amount of well-being.

Man is free.--1789 put in action the sublime precept of the gospel. He
holds his destiny in his own hands. But the rights which he enjoys impose
new duties on him. If _equality_ be the sentiment which predominates in
our day, we should take care not to confound it with the leveling of
Communism. Nor is it externally to us, but within ourselves, that it
should be developed, by intellectual and moral culture.

History preserves the student from being led astray by a too servile
adherence to any system. It exposes the folly of the "social contract,"
and of the idyllic dreams of the advantages of savage life. It shows that
nature, instead of being prodigal of her treasures, distributes them with
a niggardly hand, and that it is necessary to conquer her by labor,
intelligence and patience before we can control her.

It shows us human liberty growing stronger every day, thanks to moral and
intellectual progress, supported by the two powerful props of property,
the complement of man, the material reflection of his spiritual power; and
capital, the fruit of abstinence, the symbol of moral power and the result
of enlightened activity.

History walks with a firm step, because it feels secure in a knowledge of
the laws of human nature, and in its experience of the successive
manifestations of social life. Instead of the vagueness of ideal
conceptions, it allows us to grasp and to appreciate what is real in life.
It does not confine itself to the study of man. It makes us acquainted
with _men_, whose wants extend and are ennobled in proportion to the
perfection of their faculties. The feelings and the intellect are
simultaneously developed in man. The savage is the most egotistical of
men.

Hence, we believe that Political Economy cannot dispense with the services
of morals and philosophy, of history and law; for these are branches of
one common trunk, through all of which the self-same sap circulates.




V.


The isolation of the theory of Political Economy is peculiar to our own
day. In more remote times, we find this study confounded with the other
moral sciences, of which it was an integral part. When the genius of Adam
Smith gave it a distinct character, he did not desire to separate it from
those branches of knowledge without which it could only remain a bleached
plant from the absence of the sunlight of ethics.

We must renounce the singular idea,(24) that thousands of years could pass
away without leaving any trace of what enlightened men had thought and
elaborated in the matter of Political Economy, among so many nations, and
that people should never have thought of cultivating this rich
intellectual domain, while in every other direction, it is easy for us to
ascend by a road already cleared up to the most remote antiquity.

It has already been acknowledged, that the _classic domain_, fertilized by
intellectual culture on a large scale and on a small one, was exceedingly
rich in valuable indications, although they do not present themselves
under the distinct form, which later affected the different branches of
public life.

As to the pretended _primitive simplicity_ of the middle ages, which it is
claimed, prevailed during that period, a species of economic vegetation,
those who maintain it forget the long series of communistic theories
which, at near intervals, found expression in many a bloody struggle, and
whose repression required the combined efforts of Church and State.

Doubtless, it is not in their modern forms that the elements of
politico-economical science are to be found, in the past. But when we
succeed in reuniting the scattered and broken parts; when we have made our
way into the customs, decrees, ordinances, capitularies, laws and
regulations of those times; when, so to speak, we come, unaware, upon the
life of nations, in the most ingenuous and confidential documents which
reflect it most faithfully because most simply, we may well be astonished
at the results obtained. Where we expected, perhaps, to find only
erudition, we reap a rich harvest of lessons which are all the more
valuable for being disinterested.

Legislative and administrative acts frequently develop real economic
doctrines. It is easy to discover in them the onward course of a theory
which plunges directly into practical applications.

What results might we not expect from these efforts, if the genius of
investigation and of divination, which has so elevated historical studies
in our day, should have an observing and penetrating eye in this
direction! How limited was the field on which Guérard erected the
scientific monument which he has left us in his _Polyptique d'Irminon_;
and how precious are the lessons he leaves us, since we have here to do,
not with the history of professed doctrines or unlooked-for events, but
with the historical development of economic society which shows us the
living march of principles.




VI.


Political Economy is not, as we have just said, a new science. It has been
a distinct science only a short time. Until the eighteenth century, it was
confounded with philosophy, morals, politics, law and history. But it does
not follow, that, because it has grown so in importance, as to deserve a
place of its own, its intimate relationship with the noble studies which
had until then absorbed it should cease. There is another consequence also
to be deduced from this. From the moment that Political Economy ceases to
be considered a new science, it finds a long series of ancestors behind
it, since it is compelled to investigate a past to which so many bonds
unite it. This duty may increase its difficulties, but, at the same time,
it singularly adds to the attractions of a study which, instead of
presenting us only with the arid deductions of dogmatism, comes to us with
all the freshness and all the color of life.

We may allow those who make Political Economy simply a piece of arithmetic
to ignore these retrospective studies and their importance; for
mathematics has little to do with history. But it is otherwise with the
life of nations. These would discover whence they come, in order to learn
whither they are tending.

They are not obeying a vain interest of curiosity, as J. B. Say supposed,
when, in sketching a short history of the progress of Political Economy,
he said: "However, every kind of history has a right to gratify
curiosity." It is a thing to be regretted, that this eminent thinker could
thus ignore one of the essential elements of the science to which he
rendered such great and unquestioned services. A sense for the historical
was wanting in him. "The history of a science," he writes,(25) "is not
like the narration of things that have happened. What would it profit us
to make a collection of absurd opinions, of decried doctrines which
deserved to be decried? It would be at once useless and fastidious to thus
exhume them in case we perfectly knew the public economy of social bodies.
It can be of little concern to us to learn what our predecessors have
dreamed about this subject, and to describe the long series of mistakes in
practice which have retarded man's progress in the research after truth.
Error is a thing to be forgotten, not learned." As if that which was once
to be found in time is not to-day to be found in space; as if there ever
was an institution that did not have its _raison d' etre_ and had not
constituted a resting place in the search after a higher truth or of a
more intelligent and salutary application of an old one! There are a great
many actual systems and a great many present facts which can be understood
only by the help of history; and how frequently would not an acquaintance
with history serve to keep us from taking for marvelous inventions the
antiquated machinery of other ages, whose only advantage and only merit
are that they have remained unknown. How much of the pretended daring of
innovators has been old trumpery which the wisdom of the times had cast
off as rubbish. Besides, as Bacon has said: "Verumtamen sæpe necessarium
est, quod non est optimum."




VII.


It is not the result of mere chance that the greatest economists have been
both historians and philosophers. We need only mention Adam Smith, Turgot,
Malthus, Sismondi, Droz, Rossi and Léon Faucher. It is too frequently
forgotten that the father of modern Political Economy, Adam Smith, looked
upon the science as only one part of the course of moral philosophy which
he taught at Glasgow, and which embraced four divisions:

1. _Universal theology._--The existence and attributes of God; principles
or faculties of the human mind, the basis of religion.

2. _Ethics._--Theory of the moral sentiments.

3. _Moral principles relating to justice._--In this, as we learn from one
of Adam Smith's pupils in a sketch preserved by David Stewart, he followed
a plan which seems to have been suggested to him by Montesquieu. He
endeavored to trace the successive advances of jurisprudence from the most
barbarous times to the most polished. He carefully showed how the arts
which minister to subsistence, and to the accumulation of property, act on
laws and governments, and are productive of advances and changes in them
analogous to those they experience themselves.

In the first part of his course, as we learn from the same authority, he
examined the various political regulations not founded on the principle of
justice but in expediency, the object of which is to increase the wealth,
the power and the prosperity of the state. From this point of view, he
considered the political institutions relating to commerce, finance, the
ecclesiastical and military establishments. His lectures on the different
subjects constitute the substance of the work he afterwards published on
the wealth of nations. A pupil of Hutcheson, Adam Smith always applied the
experimental method, "which, instead of losing itself in magnificent and
hazardous speculations, attaches itself to certain and universal facts
discovered to us by our own consciousness, by language, literature,
history and society."(26) Before taking the professorship of philosophy,
Adam Smith had taught belleslettres and rhetoric in Edinburgh, in 1748. He
had written a work on the origin and formation of languages; and it was
because he had profoundly studied the moral sciences that it was given to
him to inaugurate a new science and to become a great economist. Mr.
Cousin has laid great stress on Adam Smith's taste and talent for history.
"Whatever the subject he treats, he turns his eyes backward over the road
traversed before himself, and he illuminates every object on his path by
the aid of the torch which reflection has placed in his hand. Thus, in
Political Economy, his principles not only prepare the future but renew
the past, and discover the reason, heretofore unknown, of ancient facts
which history had gathered together without understanding them. It is not
saying enough to remark that Adam Smith possessed a great variety of
historical information; we must add that he possessed the real historical
spirit." Thanks to this eminent faculty of his, the Glasgow philosopher
acquired great influence over minds. In 1810, when the French empire had
reached the zenith of its greatness, Marwitz wrote: "There is a monarch as
powerful as Napoleon: Adam Smith." We need not recall Turgot's historical
researches.

Malthus' chief title to distinction, his work on Population, is as much a
historical work as a politico-economical one; and it is not sufficiently
known that he was professor of history and Political Economy in the
college of the East India Company at Aylesbury.

We need say no more on this subject. The works of the other writers whom
we have mentioned are too well known to permit any one to think that they
excluded history and moral science from the study of Political Economy.
Hence the school which has risen up in Germany,(27) and which is
endeavoring to do for Political Economy what Savigny, Eichhorn, Schrader,
Mommsen, Rudorff, and so many other illustrious scholars have done for
jurisprudence, cannot be rightly accused of rashness. It has done nothing
but unfurl the noble banner borne by the most venerated masters of the
science.




VIII.


At the head of this school stands William Roscher, professor of Political
Economy at the University of Leipzig, whose excellent work, The Principles
of Political Economy, in which he follows _the historical method_, we have
just translated. William Roscher is (1857) scarcely forty years of age. He
was born at Hanover, October 21, 1817. His laborious and simple life is
that of a worthy representative of the science. "You ask me," he wrote us
recently, "to give you some information concerning the incidents of my
life. I have, thank God, but very little to tell you. Lives whose history
it is interesting to relate are seldom happy lives." He confined himself
to giving us a few dates which are, so to say, the landmarks of a career
full of usefulness. Roscher, from 1835 to 1839, studied jurisprudence and
philology at the universities of Göttingen and Berlin. The learned
teachers who exercised the greatest influence on his intellectual
development were the historians Gervinus and Ranke, the philologist K. O.
Müller and the Germanist Albrecht. It is easy to see that he went to a
good school, and that he profited by it. He was made doctor in 1838;
admitted in 1840 as _Privat-docent_ at Göttingen; appointed in 1843
professor extraordinary at the same university, and called in 1844 to fill
the chair of titular professor at Erlangen. Since 1848 he has acted in the
same capacity in the University of Leipzig, where he was for six years
member of the Poor Board, where he teaches also in the agricultural
college. His fame has grown rapidly. Many of the German universities have
emulated one another for the honor of possessing him, but he has not been
willing to leave Leipzig. His first remarkable work was his doctor's
thesis: _De historicæ doctrinæ apud sophistas majores vestigiis_, written
in 1838. In 1842, he published his excellent work, which has since become
classical: "The Life, Labors and age of Thucydides."(28) From that time,
important works, all bearing the stamp of varied and profound scientific
acquirements, and of an erudition remarkable for sagacity and elegance,
have followed one another without interruption. In 1843, he treated the
question of luxury(29) with a master hand, and laid the foundation of his
great work--only the first part of which has thus far appeared--at the same
time tracing on a large scale the programme of a course of Political
Economy according to the historical method.(30) In 1844, he published his
historical study on Socialism and Communism,(31) and in 1845 and 1846, his
ideas on the politics and the statistics of systems of agriculture. He is,
besides, author of an excellent work on the corn-trade;(32) of a
remarkable book on the colonial system;(33) of a sketch on the three forms
of the state;(34) of a memoir on the relations between Political Economy
and classical antiquity;(35) of a work of the greatest interest, on the
history of economic doctrines in England in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries--a work full of the most curious researches;(36) of a book on the
economic principle of forest economy,(37) and lastly, of the great work,
the first part of which we have translated, under the title of The
Principles of Political Economy, and which is to be completed by the
successive publication of three other volumes, on the Political Economy of
Agriculture, and the related branches of primitive production, the
Political Economy of Industry and Commerce, and one on the Political
Economy of the State and the Commune. This work, when completed, will be a
real cyclopedia of the science.(38)

Side by side with William Roscher, we must mention a young economist,
Knies, formerly professor at the University of Marburg, but whom political
persecution compelled to accept a secondary position at the gymnasium of
Schaffhausen, for a time, and who fills, to-day, in the University of
Freiburg, in Breisgau, a position more worthy of his great talent. We
hope, in a work which we intend to publish, on Political Economy in
Germany, to make the public acquainted with the works of this writer. They
deserve to attract the most serious attention. We know of few works which
equal his Political Economy, written on the historical method.(39) We
shall also have something to say of another economist, formerly professor
at Marburg, a victim, also, of the power of the elector of Hesse,
Hildebrand, now professor at the University of Zurich. His
National-OEkonomie(40) is a book replete with interest, and we have nowhere
met with a better criticism of Proudhon's system, than in its pages. If
the new school had produced but these three men, it would still have left
its impress on the history of the science.

Other works, no less important, will claim our attention in the book to
which we have already devoted many years of labor. If we carry out our
intention, we shall review the works of a great many scholars, of great
merit, whose names only are, unfortunately, known outside of Germany. The
works of Rau, of Hermann, of Robert Mohl, of Hannsen, Helferich, Schütz,
Kosegarten, Wirth etc., are a rich mine, from which we hope to draw much
valuable information. Nor shall we neglect the original productions of J.
Moser, the Franklin of Germany, nor the quaint, but sometimes striking,
ideas of Adam Müller. Lastly, our learned friend, Professor Stein of
Vienna, will afford us an opportunity to show forth the merit of important
and extensive works, animated by the philosophic spirit. For the present,
we must confine ourselves to a view of the application of the historical
method to Political Economy.

There is a rather widespread prejudice existing against this order of
works, a souvenir of the struggle carried on formerly, between Thibaut and
Savigny, which inclines people to suppose that the historical school leans
towards the political doctrines of the past, and that it is hostile to the
liberal spirit of modern times. Nothing can be farther from the truth. The
names of Roscher, Knies and Hildebrand are sufficient to remove this
prejudice. Their works, inspired by an enlightened love for progress, do
not allow of such a misconstruction. The historical point of view does not
consist in the worship of the past, any more than in the depreciation of
the present. It does not view the succession of phenomena as a fluctuation
of events without unity or purpose. On the contrary, the historical method
harmonizes wonderfully well with the wants of genuine progress. The
changes accomplished bear testimony to the free and creative power of man,
acting within the limit permitted to it by the degrees of intelligence
reached, of the development of morals, and of individual liberty. The
philosophy of Political Economy, which is the result of this calm
teaching, free from the passions of party--for science acknowledges no
adherence to party--is like that of law, opposed to the, more or less,
ingenious or rash dreams, which build the world over again in thought. In
showing how, at all times, humanity has understood and applied the
principles which govern the production of wealth, it may say, with the
Roman jurisconsult: "Justitiam namque colimus ... æquum ab iniquo
separantes ... veram nisi fallor philosophiam, non simulatam affectantes."
"The human mind," says Rossi, "endeavoring to attain to a knowledge of
itself, estimating its strength, taking a method, and applying it with a
consciousness of its mode of procedure to the knowledge of all things;
such is philosophy. Without it, there is no science in any branch of human
knowledge." Thus do we rise, with the aid of a critical mind, by careful
investigation and great sagacity, to the truths founded on observations
made.




IX.


There is another method, which, starting out from principles, evident of
themselves, develops science by way of conclusions drawn, after the manner
of the geometricians. The apparent severity and simplicity of this method
are very seductive, and very dangerous, when we have to deal not with
figures, but with men; when the varied, complex and delicate exigencies
which accumulate when human nature comes into play do not exactly square
with the formula; and, when instead of dealing with abstractions, we have
to tackle realities. One of our venerated teachers, the illustrious Rossi,
thought he might remove the difficulty by drawing a distinction between
_pure_ Political Economy and _applied_ Political Economy. It is not
without a certain amount of hesitation that we dare differ with so high an
authority; but confess we must, this distinction is far from satisfying
us. The doubt it has left in our mind has been the principal cause which
has inclined us to the historical method. "Rational Political Economy,"
says Rossi, "is the science which investigates the nature, the causes and
the movement of wealth, by basing itself on the general and constant facts
of human nature, and of the external world. In applied Political Economy,
the science is taken as the mean. Account is taken of external facts.
Nationality, time and place play an important part."

Let us for a moment accept these definitions; what is the consequence?
That there are two sciences, the one of which, purely speculative, has
more to do with philosophy than with the permanent conflicts which agitate
the world; the other of which could not alone furnish us with rules in
practice, nor with a formulary for the measures to be taken in a given
case, since such a pretension would be both vain and ridiculous, but which
would inform the practical judgment of men charged with the solution of
the numberless difficult and complicated questions which come up every
day. If pure science refuses to interfere in the affairs of this world;
if, as the learned originator of the doctrine we are just now considering
gives us to understand, it would compromise the solution of questions by
the intoxication of logic, and the ambition of perfect system; if,
consequently, it is to be worshipped like a motionless and inactive
divinity, how could this platonic satisfaction suffice us? Would not the
opponents of economic doctrines be disposed to acknowledge all the
principles, provided the consequences to be drawn from them were left to
themselves; and would they not come to us, bristling with arguments drawn
from the circumstances of nationality, time and space, to refute the
possibility of applying pure science?


    On ne vaincra jamais les Romains que dans Rome.


This, therefore, is the ground we must explore. We must develop applied
Political Economy which takes cognizance of external circumstances. To do
this, no one will question that the best and most decisive of methods is
the historical, which concerns itself with time, space and nationality,
and which leads to proper reformation where reformation is wanted.

Moreover, principles will be no less firmly established by historical
induction than by dogmatic deduction, and, moreover, science will be
inseparable from art. We are not of those who deny principles, or who
challenge them. What we desire is, that they should not be worshiped as
fetiches, but that they should enter into the very life-blood of nations.

Further: the abstract deductions of pure science do not leave us without
disquietude, since they treat man much more like a material than like a
moral force. Under the vigorous procedure of speculative mathematics, man
becomes a constant quantity for all times and all countries, whereas he
is, in reality, a variable quantity. All the elements put in play are
ideal entities, the reverse of which we find in poetry, where


    Tout prend un corps, une ame, un esprit, un visage!


and where everything loses the character of life, and is transformed into
inanimate units. Man is something different from the sum of the services
he may be made to render, and from the sum of enjoyments which may be
procured for him. We must not run the risk of lowering him to the level of
a living tool; and from the moment that we are required to take his moral
destiny into account, what becomes of abstract calculation?




X.


We have been wrong, says Rossi, in reproaching Quesnay for his famous
_laissez faire, laissez passer_, which is pure science. We, also, are of
opinion that the reproach was ill founded, for it proceeded from a wrong
conception of the principle itself. But it seems to us that, far from
condemning this doctrine in its serious application, the historical method
may serve to explain and to justify it. Employing less of rigidity and
dryness in form, it reaches consequences more in harmony with social life.
But it is not to be imagined that we do not meet in this way with many
ancient and glorious precedents. The great principles of industrial
liberty, as well as those of commercial liberty, originated in France.
Forbonnais was right when he said: "We may congratulate ourselves on being
able to find, in our old books and ancient ordinances, wherewith to
vindicate for ourselves the right to that light which we generally
supposed to have been revealed to the English and Dutch before us." The
further Forbonnais carried his researches into our annals, the greater the
number of traces of opposition to the prejudices in favor of exclusion and
monopoly, so long made principles of administrative policy, did he
find.(41)

The famous axiom, _laissez faire_, and _laissez passer_, the subversive
tendencies of which people affect to condemn, was not invented by Quesnay.
He only gave a scientific bearing to what was the inspiration of a
merchant called Legendre. The latter, consulted by Colbert on the best
means of protecting commerce, dropped these words which have since become
so celebrated.

We must not lose sight of their real meaning, nor misunderstand the
intention which dictated them. What Quesnay said was this: "Let everything
alone which is injurious, neither to good morals, nor to liberty, nor to
property, nor to personal security. Allow everything to be sold which has
been produced without crime." And he added: "Only freedom judges aright;
only competition never sells too dear, and always pays a reasonable and
legitimate price." Far from being the absence of rule, liberty is the rule
itself. To _laisser faire_ the good is to prevent evil.(42)

There is need of institutions to complete the exercise of the independence
acquired by labor, and of laws to regulate that exercise. The _laisser
faire_ and _laisser passer_ of economists is, in no way, like the absolute
formula, which some have denounced and others sought to utilize, as
relieving authority of all care and all intervention.

To understand this maxim aright, we must go back to the oppressive regime
of ancient society. Quesnay's formula was, first of all, a protest against
the restraints which hampered the free development of labor. But it did
not tend to abrogate the office of legislator, nor to deprive society or
the individual of the support of the public power which watches over the
fulfillment of our destiny.

It may have seemed convenient to find in the gravity of a
politico-economical principle, an excuse for the sweets of legislative and
administrative _far niente_, but it is generally conceded that the role of
authority has grown, rather than diminished, under the regime of the
liberty of labor. The task is, in our days, a hard one, both for
individuals and nations; for liberty dispenses its favors only to the
masculine virtues of a laborious and an enlightened people.

Liberty is not license. It refuses to bend under the yoke, but it submits
to rule. The mission of authority is not to constrain, but to counsel; not
to command, but to help accomplish; not to absorb individual activity, but
to develop it. It does not pretend to raise a convenient indifference on
the part of government, nor the indolent withdrawal of all protective
influence to the dignity of a principle. To say, on the other hand, that
the _laisser faire_ and _laisser passer_ of the economists means: Let
robbery alone; let fraud alone etc., is to amuse one's self playing upon
words, and to argue in a manner unworthy of any serious answer. Under
pretext of painting a picture of economic doctrine, we are given its
caricature. Such has never been the system, to the elaboration of which
the purest hearts and noblest intellects have devoted themselves. A
negation does not constitute the science of Political Economy.

It is very convenient to inclose humanity within a circle of action, drawn
with rigorous precision, and to govern movements seen in advance. But such
artificial conceptions mutilate the activity of man. To guarantee man all
liberty, and prevent its abuse--such are the data of the problem. The work
is a great and difficult one. Far from yielding in point of elevation to
ideal systems, it is superior to them in extent and variety of
combinations. Those who ignore its bearing, yield, it may be, to a certain
indolence of intellect. Restrained within its natural limits, the famous
_laisser faire_ and _laisser passer_ of the Physiocrates deserves even
to-day our respect and our confidence. It ought to be preserved in the
grateful memory of men, side by side with the maxim which Quesnay
succeeded in having printed at Versailles, by the hand of Louis XV
himself: "Pauvres paysans, pauvre royaume; pauvre royaume, pauvre
souverain."(43)




XI.


To return to the question of method. Rossi made use of an ingenious
example to explain his thought:(44) "Are," he inquires, "these deductions
[of pure science] perfectly legitimate; are these consequences always
true? It is incontestably true that a projectile, discharged at a certain
angle, will describe a certain curve; this is a mathematical truth. It is
equally true, that the resistance offered to the projectile by the medium
through which it moves modifies the speculative result in practice, to
some extent; this is a truth of observation. Is the mathematical deduction
false? By no means; but it supposes a vacuum. I hasten to acknowledge it.
Speculative economy also neglects certain facts and leaves certain
resistances out of account." Now, from the moment that we have to deal
with human interests, it is not possible to suppose a vacuum, to neglect
the most vulgar facts, and the most common instances of resistance, nor to
lose one's self in abstraction. The correctives of applied Political
Economy either may not wipe out this original sin, or else they run great
danger of covering up the principles themselves. In ballistics, again, we
may measure the resistance which the medium in which we are obliged to
operate, makes the force of impulsion and the target both obey the same
law, and yield to the same process of calculation. But is it thus when you
touch upon man's innermost and most sensitive part? Is there not danger
that the hypotheses may be deceitful, and that you may be accused of
toiling in a vacuum? We well know the solid reason that may be opposed to
sarcasm of this nature; but is it expedient to lay one's self open to it?

Moreover, the consequences are not great enough to warrant us to expose
ourselves to the danger. The principles of pure science are very small in
number. They might even, be easily reduced to one, of which M. Cousin has
been the eloquent interpreter--human liberty. This liberty has no need of
Political Economy to shine with the luster of evidence; nothing can
prevail against it. We can prove that it is as fecund as it is
respectable; but if the science of wealth should endeavor to demonstrate
the contrary, the primordial bases of society, liberty, property and the
family would not be less sacred nor less necessary, for they are the right
of humanity. They could not be put aside, even under pretext of any
mechanism which would claim to produce more.(45) These sovereign
principles of economy flow from the moral law, and they have no reason to
dread the power of facts, for the prosperity of nations depends on the
respect with which they are surrounded and the guarantees by which they
are protected.

We have spoken of the moral law; and, indeed, in our opinion, it is
impossible to banish it from the domain of public economy. Any other point
of view seems to us too narrow. And when we see eminent men go astray in
the pursuit of an ideal which fails to take the human soul into account,
and which finds nothing but equations where there are feelings and ideas,
we cannot help thinking that they are unfaithful to the thought of the
founder of the science, Adam Smith. Man is not simply a piece of
machinery. He does not blindly submit to external impulse. Rather is he
himself, the greatest of impulses. But to govern things, he must first
learn to conquer himself. Personal interest is the powerful motive which
he obeys. Man does not live alone, in a state of isolation, in the world.
_Væ soli!_ He lives in society and profits by the relations which he forms
with other beings, intelligent like himself, and for whom he has a natural
feeling of sympathy.

The good that comes to them yields satisfaction to him, and the evil that
befalls them falls on him likewise. He cannot turn back entirely upon his
own personality. Besides his own interest, he feels and shares another
interest--the interest of all. Personal interest is perfectly legitimate.
The love of self cannot be condemned. The Savior himself has enjoined us
to love our neighbor as ourselves. To love him more than ourselves is a
very high and beautiful virtue. It is the self-abnegation which inspired
Christian heroes. But heroism is rare, and cannot be imposed, nor taken,
as a rule. Personal interest is a powerful stimulant, and the superior
harmony of social relations makes it contribute to the general good.

What must be condemned is a fatal deviation of this sentiment which
destroys its effect and narrows its actions. What we need to prevent is
the degeneration of personal interest into an egotism which parches,
instead of fertilizing, and which compromises the future by the exclusive
search after present advantage; for egotism is short-sighted. On the other
hand, the broader and more generous feeling which inclines us to
sympathize with our fellow beings in their sorrows, and to unite our
destiny to theirs; that is, the feeling of the general interest, has a
limit too.

It would be falsified if it absorbed the individual; if it destroyed the
most powerful motive-force by drying up the abundant source of activity;
if it attacked moral energy by enervating responsibility; if it extended
the circle of results obtained to such an extent that scarcely any one
should feel the rebound.

The evil produced by egotism, that sad travesty of personal interest,
appears under a form quite as formidable when the general interest takes
the form of communism. The coöperation of personal interest and of the
general interest is always necessary, both for individual profit and
social advantage. There is as much danger in annihilating the individual
as in exalting him. History furnishes us with memorable examples of this.
It does not allow us to go astray in the narrow ways of a peevish and
jealous personality, nor to lose ourselves in the vague labyrinth of a
chimerical and false communism. The latter would destroy what constitutes
the power and dignity of man. It would wipe out the most prominent
features of his noble nature, by destroying the support of energy and
activity and the food of moral force.




XII.


But, we are told, Political Economy is only the science of selfishness;
Adam Smith is the prophet of individualism; grow rich _per fas et nefas_
is its ultimate teaching. Such a judgment is evidence of much levity and
little enlightenment. How could the man who conceived the study of human
interests on so large a scale, the philosopher who acknowledged Hutcheson
as his master and gave his ideas a still more expansive character, be the
apostle of egotism; and how can the science which he founded be its
gospel? There is here an error of fact and a defect of appreciation.
Hutcheson had based moral philosophy on the feeling which, according to
him, engendered all the other virtues, on benevolence, which is
disinterested, busied with the welfare of others, with the public weal and
the general interest. Adam Smith went further, and sought to base it on a
still more energetic feeling, on sympathy.

The first sentence of his Theory of the Moral Sentiments, which is a full
resumé of his theory, is as follows: "How selfish soever man may be
supposed, there are evidently some principles in his nature which interest
him in the fortune of others, and render their happiness necessary to him,
though he derives nothing from it, except the pleasure of seeing it." And
this is no empty declaration on his part. It is the thought which of all
in his book is nearest to his heart; and hence he energetically assails
those philosophers who look upon self-love and the refinements of
self-love as the universal cause of all our sentiments, and seek to
explain sympathy by self-love.

La Rochefoucauld, Mandeville and Helvetius never met with a more
determined or energetic adversary. Nowhere have the sweet and amiable
virtues, such as ingenuous condescension, indulgent humanity, and the
respectable and severe virtues, such as disinterestedness and self-control
which subject our movements to the requirements of the dignity of our
nature, been better understood or interpreted. Adam Smith is the
philosopher of sympathy.(46) His theory triumphs over the cowardly and
shameful egotism which concentrates the moral life of the individual in
himself, and separates it from the life of the human race of the _outré_
stoicism which refuses the aid of sentiment to reason.(47) According to
him, the law of private morals is sympathy; the law of natural
jurisprudence, justice; the law of the production of wealth, free labor.
But while he defended this principle with energy, he did not become guilty
of a real recantation by worshiping the idol he had just overthrown. He
would have been culpable of the strangest of all contradictions if he had
made the vice which he had just lacerated the very pivot of another part
of his teaching.

We regret that this essay, which has already very much exceeded the limits
we assigned it in the beginning, will not permit us to reproduce here
Knies' beautiful demonstration, in which he so learnedly and eloquently
vindicates Adam Smith from this strange imputation, thereby placing
Political Economy on its true basis, the basis of morals, by removing in a
decisive way, all pretext of error and all means of subterfuge. This part
is one of the best features in his most excellent work on "Political
Economy, from the historical Point of View." We shall return to this
matter.




XIII.


What is there that political economists have not been charged with? They
have been accused, above all, of a cold heartedness and cruelty, and the
sentence passed on them has been resumed in these words: "Political
Economy has no bowels!" Indeed, the representative of the science, who has
been most attacked and who has been held up as a picture of impassible
insensibility; on whom have been heaped the most bloody outrages, is
Malthus. Let us hear him. He tells us in his work on Political Economy,
that if a country had no other means to grow rich, except by seeking for
success in the struggle with other countries, at the cost of a reduction
of the wages of labor, he would unhesitatingly say: Away with such riches;
that it is much to be desired that the working classes should be well
remunerated, and this for a reason much more important than all the
considerations relating to wealth; that is, the happiness of the great
mass of society. And he goes on to say, that he knows nothing more
detestable than the idea of knowingly condemning the laboring classes to
cover themselves with rags, to lodge in wretched huts, to enable us to
sell a few more stuffs and calicoes to foreign countries. Certain it is,
that no defender, however determined, of the laboring classes, has said
anything stronger or more deeply felt. The reason is, that nothing was
more foreign to Malthus' ideas than the systematic rigidity of
mathematical theories of wealth; that, a minister of the Gospel, he had
meditated on its high precepts. His whole doctrine is based on the moral
idea. "He was profoundly convinced that there are principles in Political
Economy which are true only in as far as they are restricted within
certain limits. He saw the principal difficulty of the science in the
frequent combination of complicated causes, in the action and reaction of
causes on one another, and in the necessity of setting limits or making
exceptions to a great number of important propositions." Here we are ever
brought back to the undulating ground of living science, instead of having
to follow the rectilineal way traced out by the dead letter. We are always
driven back, whatever may be pretended to the contrary, to the realities
of which history alone possesses the secret. The idea of wealth cannot
absorb everything when there is question of judging and enlightening men.
To do this, it is necessary to know the various phases of social
housekeeping, what nations have thought of economic interests which have
never ceased to interest them greatly, what they have attempted and what
they have attained.

Hence, we must turn over the leaves of the book of the past, and study its
economic aspect, as we have studied its political and literary aspect. We
must follow living nations through their divers periods of development,
and fathom the causes of the destruction of those that are dead. When we
are dealing with the comparative study of the economic destinies of
nations, our investigations are limited to a small number of individual
nations--a further reason not to omit any, and above all, to scrutinize, as
an anatomist would with his scalpel, the principle of life of those which
are no more. We may, by accounting to ourselves for the immense variety of
phenomena which are brought to light by the _application_ of principles to
facts, and in which nothing is absolute or permanent, in which, on the
contrary, everything is relative and successive, acquire that sureness of
touch and correctness of vision which are among the most valuable
conquests of science.

It would be a mistake to suppose that theory simplifies practical
solutions. Far from providing us with a sort of formulary, it teaches us
to put our finger on a number of difficulties. It brings to the surface
the many aspects and fertile and varied considerations, the examination of
which is the mission of the real statesman and legislator. In this way,
the action of thought and the power of the moral idea are revealed with
most _éclat_. Man ceases to be an inert element, and manifests himself as
a sensible being, and the sublime thought of Pascal: "Humanity is like one
man who lives and learns always," is verified by the result. The wish to
violently abdicate the past, it would be vain and rash to attempt to
realize. The lessons it transmits to us are as instructive as the picture
it unrolls before our eyes is attractive. We have no longer but to see and
hear, to be cured of the most generous impatience with what is, and to
retreat from the most perilous attempts.




XIV.


The unvarying testimony of ages affirms the continued and gradual
amelioration of man by individual energy and moral thought.(48) Want and
suffering have urged him forward. Foresight, labor, sacrifice and virtue
have in part redeemed him. No right has been lessened or usurped, and
every step in civilization has been a step in the way of freedom. Instead
of making the latter responsible for a material and moral wretchedness
which it is called upon to cure, we may prove, that, in proportion as real
liberty and legal guarantees increase, evil diminishes.

We do not desire to yield to a convenient optimism, and deny the
sufferings which weigh only too heavily on the world. We are far from
having reached the end assigned to our efforts; but let not the hope we
entertain of further progress blind us to that which has already been
accomplished. This latter shows us that we are on the right road, and that
we have not done unwisely in giving free rein to the human faculties.
Sudden changes are made only in theaters. In the real world, the march of
progress is slow and laborious. It may be accelerated by a happy hit; but
it would be vain to try to hurry it.

Man still suffers. No one desires to deny the evil, but only to estimate
its extent. Yet it cannot be gainsaid that its fatal empire is narrowing
instead of enlarging. Especially is it the progress accomplished in the
higher regions of intellect and of the feelings which here exerts its
beneficent influence. On our moral greatness depends our material power.
The elevation or debasement of character, the energy or debility of the
will--such is the first source of good or evil. The world, a Chalmers
rightly says, is so constituted that we should be materially happy if we
were morally good.

Industrial progress helps, we have said, towards moral perfection. It is
not the source of that perfection, but its instrument; for ignorance and
misery, its habitual attendants, are poor advisers. Political Economy
shows how the goods of this world are multiplied. It shows how modest
comfort may become more and more general, and thus an impetus be given to
all noble virtues without awakening a blind passion for riches. It teaches
moderation instead of exciting covetousness, nor does it come in conflict
with the sublime words of Saint Augustine: "The family of men, living by
faith, use the goods of the earth as strangers here, not to be captivated
by them or turned away by them from the goal to which they tend, which is
God, but to find in them a support which, far from aggravating, lightens
the burthen of this perishable body which weighs down the soul."




XV.


Looked at from below, all things diverge. Looked at from above, all things
run into one another and combine with one another. It is one of the great
merits of the historical method, that it raises the point of observation
and gives the observer the support of tradition and good sense, that
master of life; that it prevents a divorce between different branches of
knowledge of the same order, which constitute but one intellectual family,
which there is no question of confounding, and which it would be dangerous
to isolate.

Aristotle, that universal genius, had discovered Political Economy, and it
was the historical method which revealed it to him. Be it added, that the
great philosopher had seen but one phase of the science, chrematistics,
and that his ideas here bear the impress of the age in which he lived.
Aristotle, however, distinguished this science from all others and from
domestic economy, which is so akin to it. Doubtless, he did not found the
modern study of Political Economy, but his powerful intellect gave him a
presentiment of it.

The honor of producing at once, Adam Smith, Quesnay and Turgot belongs to
the eighteenth century. It was in the course of philosophy at Glasgow that
this study found a definite place. The illustrious founder of the science
of Political Economy did not contemplate dissolving the ancient alliance
between it and the moral sciences, history, philosophy, jurisprudence,
belles-lettres--all of which he had explored and studied profoundly. Let
those whose ambition it is to walk, even at a distance, in the footsteps
of Adam Smith, not forget what was the cradle of the noble study to which
they have devoted their intellects.

L. WOLOWSKI.





INTRODUCTION.




                                Chapter I.


Fundamental Ideas.



                                Section I.


Goods--Wants.


The starting point, as well as the object-point of our science is Man.(49)

Every man has numberless wants, physical and intellectual.(50)(51) Wants
are either necessaries, decencies (_Anstandsbedürfnisse_) or luxuries. The
non-satisfaction of necessary wants causes disease or death; that of the
wants of decency endangers one's social position.(52) The much greater
number, and the longer continuance of his wants are among the most
striking differences between man and the brute:(53) wants such as
clothing, fuel,(54) tools, and those resulting from his much longer period
of infancy; which last, together with other causes, has contributed so
largely to make marriage necessary and universal. While the lower animals
have no wants, but necessities, and while their aggregate-want, even in
the longest series of generations, admits of no qualitative increase, the
circle of man's wants is susceptible of indefinite extension.(55) And,
indeed, every advance in culture made by man finds expression in an
increase in the number and in the keenness of his rational wants. No man
who distinguishes himself in anything, but feels spurred thereto by a
peculiar want; and this want is both the cause and the effect of the power
which is peculiar to him. No one but the poet feels the want of poetizing;
no one but the philosopher, of philosophizing. In every particular,
intellectual or physical, in which the man is in advance of the child, he
experiences new wants unknown to the child. Our education consists, for
the most part, in awakening wants and providing for their satisfaction.

Goods are anything which can be used, whether directly or indirectly, for
the satisfaction of any true(56) or legitimate human want,(57) and whose
utility, for this purpose, is recognized. Hence, the idea goods is an
essentially relative one. Every change in man's wants, or knowledge, is
accompanied by a rapid, corresponding change, either in the limits of the
circle(58) of goods, or in their relative importance. Thus, the tobacco
plant has, probably, existed thousands of years. It became goods, however,
only from the time that man recognized its use for smoking, snuffing etc.,
and experienced the want of it for these purposes. In a similar way, the
limestone of the Solenhofen quarries has become _goods_, of considerable
importance, only since the invention of lithography; decaying bones, only
since that of bone-dust manure; caoutchouc since about 1825, and
gutta-percha, only since 1844. On the other hand, charms,(59) philters,
and even relics, since the decay of faith in their efficacy, have lost the
quality of goods. If the aggregate income of all mankind were, by some
sudden revolution, to be equally divided among all, diamonds, for
instance, would greatly decline in value, for the reason that it is
dependent, in great part, on the wants generated by vanity, or by the
desire of outshining others. Beer, tobacco etc., would rise in the scale
as goods, because the circle of those to whose wants they minister would
have been very greatly extended. On the whole, advancement in civilization
has uniformly the effect, of itself, to increase the quantity and number
of goods, the wants and knowledge of men being thereby increased. We
should reach the ideal here, if all men experienced only true or
legitimate wants, but these completely; if they could see their way,
clearly, to the satisfaction of them, and find the means of satisfying
them with just the amount of effort most conducive to their
physico-intellectual development.(60)



                               Section II.


Goods.--Economic Goods.


By economy (_Wirthschaft_=husbandry or housekeeping), we mean the
systematized activity of man, to satisfy his need (_Bedarf_=requisite) of
external goods.(61) This treatise is concerned only with economic goods
(ends or means of economy).(62) The greater the advance of civilization or
human culture, the less apt are men to pursue the satisfaction of their
wants, isolated from their fellows, or, in other words, to carry on their
economies or husbandries apart from one another. The more numerous the
wants of men, and the more different in kind their faculties are, the more
natural does exchange(63) become. Since all goods derive their character
as goods from the fact that they are destined to satisfy human wants, the
very possibility of exchange must greatly increase the possibility of
things to become goods. Think of the machinist, whose products are used
only by the astronomer, while the latter is never in a way to manufacture
them for himself. (_Hufeland._) Commerce is the series of combinations,
created by the interchange of services: "a living net of relations, which
wants and services are ever weaving and unweaving." (_Hermann._) As a
rule, with an advance in civilization, there is an increase in the number
of goods, which become economic goods, and in the number of economic goods
which become commercial goods (objects or means promotive of
commerce).(64) But this is to be considered a real advancement only to the
extent that that which is obtained is superior to that which was possessed
before, in consequence of the specialization of callings or the greater
division of labor (§ 48 ff.). When a little street Arab exacts money from
a stranger for pointing out the way, we rightly censure him; but no one
would find it improper if he should first fit himself to play the part of
a guide, and then live by his calling.(65)



                               Section III.


Goods.--The Three Classes Of Goods.


All economic goods are divided into three classes:

A. _Persons or personal services._ It is entirely repugnant to the feeling
of humanity to regard a man's person in its entirety as an instrument
intended to satisfy the wants of another.(66) Yet this happens wherever
slavery exists; in its coarsest form, in cannibalism. Among civilized
nations, we can speak, under this head, only of individual services or
capabilities of persons; or, indeed, of the aggregate of the services
rendered by them during a time determined at pleasure, or a short
time.(67)

B. _Things_, both moveable and immovable.(68)

C. _Relations_ to persons or things which may frequently be estimated just
as accurately as material goods. (The _res incorporales_ of the Roman
law.) I need only mention what is called good-will, which freely, and to
the advantage of customers themselves, but still with a limited amount of
certainty, attaches to certain localities, and for which tavern-keepers,
sometimes, as in theaters, dépôts and clubs, pay so enormous a rent.(69)
When a newspaper is sold, the purchaser frequently buys nothing but the
existing relations between his colaborers, subscribers etc. No small part
of the value of a good business firm consists in the confidence with which
it inspires all who deal with it, thus sparing them a world of care and
trouble.(70) A general may be of incalculable value to an army which he
has himself helped organize. In another, or in the service of a country
not his own, he might be entirely valueless, incapable of accomplishing
anything.(71) With the progress of civilization, as man becomes more
social, the number of valuable relations increases, while that of
legalized monopolies is wont to decrease. (_Schäffle._)(72)



                               Section IV.


Of Value.--Value In Use.


The economic value of goods is the importance they possess for the
purposes of man, considered as engaged in economy (housekeeping,
husbandry.(73))

Looked at from the point of view of the person who wishes to employ them
in his use directly, doubtless the oldest point of view, value appears
first as value in use; and here, according to the difference of subjective
purposes it is intended to subserve, we may speak of production value or
enjoyment-value; and of this last, in turn, as utilization-value, or
consumption-value. The value in use of goods, is greater in proportion as
the number of wants they are calculated to satisfy are more general and
more urgent, and in proportion as they are gratified by them more fully,
surely, durably, easily and pleasantly.(74) Hence, it is seldom possible
to find an accurate mathematical expression of the relation which exists
between the value in use of different goods.(75) Thus, it is possible to
estimate the nutritive power of different kinds of goods, the value of
wheat or of hay for instance, but not the goodness or quality of their
taste, of the attractiveness of their appearance, etc.

But, the more men become used to comparing the aggregate of human wants,
and the aggregate of the goods which minister to the satisfaction of these
wants, as if they were two great wholes, gradually shading each into the
other, the more does the value in use of the different kinds of goods
assume, for purposes of social rating or estimation, a fungible
character.(76) If a new kind of goods be produced or discovered, which
satisfies the same wants in a more complete manner than another, the
latter, although it has suffered no change, generally loses in the value
put upon it, especially if the new goods can be produced in any desired
quantity. An instance of this is the change effected in the value of the
dyers weed, woad, by the introduction of indigo.

Things present in quantities greater than the amount necessary to supply
the want they satisfy, preserve their full value in use, to the limit of
that want, after which they are simply an element of possible future
value, dependent on an increase of the want; but they have no value for
present use.(77)

The economic valuation of goods, however, is by no means exhausted, so far
as the isolated individual housekeeper is concerned, by the mere
establishing of its value in use. As the systematic effort of every
rational individual in his household management is directed towards the
obtaining, by a minimum of sacrifice of pleasure and energy, a maximum
satisfaction of his wants, even an Adam or a Crusoe is, in his economy,
compelled to estimate not only what the goods to be acquired accomplish
(value in use) but also what they will cost--cost-value. Even the most
indispensable kind of goods, for instance atmospheric air, is considered
to have no value, when it can be obtained in sufficient quantity, without
any sacrifice whatever.(78)



                                Section V.


Value.--Value In Exchange.


The value in exchange of goods, or the quality which makes them
exchangeable against other goods, is based on a combination of their value
in use with their cost-value, such as men in their intercourse with one
another will make.(79) Without value in use, value in exchange(80) is
unthinkable.

But there are many, and even indispensable goods which are not at all
susceptible of being exchanged; for instance, the light and heat of the
sun, the open sea etc.(81) Other goods, although capable of being
exchanged, have no value in exchange, because they exist in
superabundance, and may be obtained by everyone, without trouble and
without reward; for instance, drinking-water in most places, ice in
winter, and wood in the primeval forest.(82) Moreover, the idea of such
"free goods" is in great part relative. The water of a river may, for
drinking purposes, be "free" goods, and yet, for purposes of irrigation,
have great value in exchange. (_John Stuart Mill_).

But, goods, to obtain value in exchange, must, in addition to their value
in use, a value which must be recognized(83) by a certain number of
persons, at least, have the capacity of becoming the exclusive property of
some one individual, and therefore of being alienated or transferred; and
this alienation or transfer must be desired because of the difficulty to
become possessed of them in any other way.(84)



                               Section VI.


Value.--Alleged Contradiction Between Value In Use And Value In Exchange.


Recent, and especially socialistic,(85) writers have alluded to the great
"contradiction" between value in use and value in exchange. This
contradiction, however, vanishes when the above idea of economy, and the
two sides or aspects, which economic value presents, are kept steadily in
view. It is said, for instance, that a pound of gold has a much greater
value in exchange than a pound of iron; while the value in use of iron, is
incomparably greater than that of gold. I question this latter statement.
True it is, that the need of iron is much more universal and urgent than
the need of gold. On the other hand, a pound of gold yields satisfaction
to the want of that metal, much greater than is yielded by a pound of
iron, to the want of iron. We may speak of a contradiction between value
in use and value in exchange, at the farthest, only in case the existing
quantity of an article in trade, which can be done without, is not
estimated correspondingly lower than the whole existing supply of a thing
which is indispensable. But this is a case which cannot often occur. When,
for instance, wheat is very dear, as in years of scarcity, people prefer
to pay a very high price for it rather than to dispense, even in part,
with its use; and so of all the necessaries of life. As people progress in
economic culture, they become more expert in adapting the value in
exchange of related goods, not only to their cost-value, but also to their
value in use.(86)(87)

The lower the state of a nation's economy, the more isolated men live from
one another, the greater is the prominence given by them to value in use,
as compared with value in exchange, a fact which makes a valuation of
resources, which shall be universally applicable, a more difficult
matter.(88)(89)(90)



                               Section VII.


Resources Or Means (Vermögen).


_Resources_, or _means_, in the sense in which we here use the term, are
the aggregate of economic goods owned by a physical or legal person, after
deduction is made of the person's debts, and all valuable and rightful
claims have been added.(91) Hence, there are private resources,
corporative resources, municipal resources, etc., state resources,
national resources and the world's resources. In estimating the resources
of a whole people, it is, of course, necessary to make deduction of the
debts due by the individual members of the nation to their fellow
countrymen.



                              Section VIII.


Valuation Of Resources.


It has often been made a question, whether the valuation of resources
should be based on the value in use, or the value in exchange of their
constituent parts.(92) The latter has, of course, no interest, except in
so far as we are concerned with the possibility of obtaining the control
of part of the resources, or means, of another, by the surrender of a part
of one's own goods. In estimating the value of private resources, which
require to be made continually an object of trade, this point is, of
course, of the greatest importance. If certain of their component
elements, lands, for instance, belonging to a _fidei commissum_, are
incapable of entering immediately into the market, at least the revenue
they yield is measured by its value in exchange.

It is quite otherwise, even with the resources of a whole nation. Such
resources are, evidently, much more independent, and have much less need
of being exchanged against their equals, than private resources. The
foreign commerce, of the greatest and most advanced nations, has,
hitherto, been but a small quota of their internal commerce.(93) A
valuation, therefore, based on value in exchange, however interesting it
might be to enable us to determine how property is shared by the different
classes and persons that compose the nation, would afford but little
information concerning the absolute amount of the national wealth. This,
of course, applies in a much higher degree to the resources of the whole
world.

If, now, we were to estimate the resources of an entire people, or even of
the world, by summing up the value in exchange of their several component
parts, many very important elements would be left out of the account
entirely; as for instance, harbors, navigable streams, numberless
relations which have, indeed, no value in exchange whatever, but which are
of the highest importance, because promotive of the economy of the nation.
The same may be said of made roads of every description, the
politico-economical value of which may be much greater than the value in
exchange of their stock, than their cost of production etc. The increase
of the value in exchange of any of the branches of the resources of a
physical or legal person contributes towards really enriching the nation
or the world, only in case that the increased value in exchange is based
on an increased utility in quality or quantity. Should an earthquake
suddenly dry up a number of our springs, and thus give value in exchange
to the drinking water from the remaining ones, we should, indeed, witness
the introduction of a new object into the list of exchangeable goods; the
owners of springs would be able to command a larger portion of the
national resources, but at the expense of the rest of the population; and
the whole country would have become poorer in goods by the catastrophe.
Even the value in exchange of the national resources would not be
increased; for all other goods, which, hitherto, as compared with water,
had an unlimited capacity for exchange, would lose just as much of that
capacity as water had gained, as compared with them.(94) On the other
hand, if a new mineral spring should be discovered, the great value in use
of the water of which gave it value in exchange, the resources of the
nation would be really increased, not only in point of utility, but in
exchange value; for no other goods, formerly known, would, in consequence
of the discovery, lose in their exchange power.(95)



                               Section IX.


Wealth.


The possession of large and also of potentially lasting resources;
objectively, such resources themselves, we call wealth. But it must be
large in a two-fold sense; large as compared with the rational wants of
its possessor, and large, also, as compared with the resources of other
people, especially with the resources of those in the same condition of
life. To be called rich, it is not enough "to have a sufficiency," (the
individual side); it is necessary to have more than others.(96) If all men
were possessed of a great deal, but all of an exactly equal amount, each
would be compelled, it may be conjectured, to be his own chimney-sweep,
his own scavenger and "boot-black." And how could anyone, then, be
properly called wealthy? This is the social side of the idea of
wealth.(97) Hence, a person, with the same resources, might be very
wealthy in a provincial town, while, in the capital, he could enjoy only
moderate comfort.(98)



                                Section X.


Wealth.--Signs Of National Wealth.


We should have a very imperfect idea of the wealth of a people (§ 8) if we
should estimate it at the value in exchange of the sum(99)-total of the
component parts of the national resources. By the following signs,
however, an approximative notion of the value in use of the resources of a
nation may be obtained:

A. When, even the lower classes, who compose everywhere the greatest
portion of the people, are comfortable, in a condition worthy of human
beings. Thus, C. Dupin is surprised at the great quantities of meat,
butter, cheese and tea entered on the accounts of the poor-houses in
England, and the great care taken to have these of the best quality.(100)
A good symptom of such a state of things is a high average duration of
human life, especially when there is a relatively large number of births.
(§ 246.)

B. When a considerable outlay, devoted to the satisfaction of the more
refined wants, is voluntarily made, and by those only possessed of a
proper economic sense. Thus, in England, the various mission, bible, and
tract societies had, in 1841, an aggregate income of £630,000. The
expeditions in search of Franklin cost over a million pounds sterling. The
state outlay also belongs to this category, provided, that taxes are
collected and loans obtained, without any noticeable oppression. The sum
of 20,000,000 pounds sterling, voted, in 1833, by the British Parliament
for the abolition of slavery, is one of the happiest signs of the national
wealth of England.(101)

C. A large number of valuable buildings, and permanent improvements; for
instance, roads of every description, works for purposes of irrigation and
drainage. Thus, in London, from September, 1843, to September, 1845, there
were constructed squares and streets with an aggregate length of 11.1
geographical miles. The number of newly built houses in London, between
1843 and 1847, was nearly 27,000. And so, in England and Wales there are
492 geographical miles of navigable canals, while their navigable rivers
are estimated to have a length of only 449 miles. The number of miles of
railroad, in the British Empire, in 1865, was 2,897 geographical miles,
and they cost 459 million of pounds; in 1870, it was 3,270 geographical
miles, at an aggregate cost of 650 millions sterling.

D. The frequent occurrence of heavy commercial payments, which finds
expression especially in the magnitude and costliness of the most usual
medium of exchange. Thus, all payments are made in England in paper (for
sums of at least five pounds sterling) or in gold coin. Silver is used
only as small change, like copper in most other countries. (_Infra_, §
118, seq.)(102)

E. Frequent loans to foreign nations. Hence, Storch divides all countries
into borrowing or poor countries, loaning or rich countries, and
independent countries which hold a middle place between the two
former.(103)



                               Section XI.


Of Economy (Husbandry).


All normal economy(104) (husbandry) aims at securing a maximum of personal
advantage with a minimum of cost or outlay.(105) And there are always two
intellectual incentives at the foundation of this economy. There is,
first, self-interest, the positive manifestation of which is the effort to
acquire as much of the world's goods as possible, and the negative
expression of which, the effort to lose as little of them as
possible--acquisitiveness--saving. Self-interest, losing its moral, and
assuming a guilty, character, degenerates into egotism; acquisitiveness,
into covetousness; and the disposition to save, into avarice--the
_solipsismus_ of Kant. The incentive to ameliorate one's condition is
common to all men, no matter how varied the form or different the
intensity of its manifestation. It guides us all from the cradle to the
grave. It may be restricted within certain limits, but never entirely
extinguished. It is, in the domain of economy, what the instinct of
self-preservation is to our physical existence, a powerful principle of
creation, preservation and of renewed life (I. Thessal., 4, 11,
seq.).(106) Then there is the incentive of the demand of God's voice
within us, the voice of conscience, whether we call it, in philosophic
outline "the adumbration of the ideas of equity, right, benevolence, of
perfection and inner freedom," or, framing our lives in accordance with
them, the striving after the Kingdom of God.(107) It matters not, how much
the image of God may have been disfigured in most men, there is no one in
whom the longing for it has so far disappeared as to leave no trace
behind. This puts bounds to our self-interest, and transmutes it into an
earthly means to enable us to approximate to an eternal ideal.

As, in the structure of the world, the apparently opposing tendencies of
the centrifugal and centripetal forces produce the harmony of the spheres,
so, in the social life of man, self-interest and conscience produce in him
the feeling for the common good.(108) This sentiment of the common
interest is the foundation on which rise in successive gradation, the life
of the family, of the community, of the nation and of humanity, the last
of which should be coincident with the life of the Church. It, alone, can
realize the kingdom of heaven on earth. Through this sentiment alone can
religion be made active and moral. Only through it, can self-interest be
made really sure and always to the purpose. Even the most calculating mind
must acknowledge, that numberless institutions, relations etc., are useful
and even necessary to many individuals, which can be established or
maintained only from a sense of the general welfare, for the reason that
no one individual could make the sacrifice required to establish or
maintain them. And so, since commerce has wrought the interests of all men
into one great piece of net-work, the best means of obtaining wherewith to
satisfy our own wants is to help others satisfy theirs. Self-interest
causes every one to choose the course in life in which he shall meet with
the least competition and the most abundant patronage; in other words,
that which answers to the most pressing and least satisfied want of the
community. As a rule, the physician who cures the greatest number of
patients with the greatest skill, and the manufacturer who produces the
best goods cheapest, will grow to be the richest. It is, moreover, easy to
see that, according as the circle of common interests grows smaller, it
approximates to self-interest; and to "the Kingdom of God"(109) as it
grows larger. And yet, all these circles respectively condition one
another. Cosmopolitanism or church-zeal, without love of country;
patriotism, without fidelity to the community in which one lives, or love
of one's family, are more than suspicious. The reverse is also true. This
is a chief connecting link between the great apparent opposites.(110)(111)



                               Section XII.


Economy.--Grades Of Economy.


Thanks to this feeling for the common weal, the eternal and destructive
war--the _bellum omnium contra omnes_--which an unscrupulous self-interest
would not fail to generate among men engaged in the isolated prosecution
of their own economic interests, ceases in the higher, well-ordered
organization(112) of society. On it are based the various forms of economy
in common: family-economy, corporation or association-economy, municipal
economy, and national economy.(113) And these forms of economy in common
are so essentially the condition and complement of individual economy,
that the latter, without them, could either not be maintained at all, or,
at least, only in the very lowest stage of civilization.

Although the higher science of Political Economy has, nearly always, been
conceived(114) as treating of the aggregate national activity of a people,
there have been many, recently, who consider Political Economy as no real
whole, but only as a mere abstraction. This is true, especially of many
unconditional free-trade theorizers, partly from a repugnance toward the
governmental guardianship of private businesses or economy. It is true,
also, of certain philosophers who consider the idea, "the people," as
merely nominal.(115) There are, however, two things necessary to warrant
us to call a thing made up of a number of parts, one real whole: the parts
and the whole must have a reciprocal action upon one another, and the
whole, as such, must have a demonstrable action of its own. (_Drobisch._)
In this sense, "the people" is, unquestionably, a reality, and not alone
the individuals who constitute the "people." Besides, it is truly said
that all husbandry or economy supposes a will ("systematized activity"
etc., _supra_, § 2). Such a will is ascribed to individuals, to legal
persons, to the state, but not, however, to "the people," as a whole. But
this will need not be an entirely conscious one, as is plain from the case
of the less gifted and less cultured individuals engaged in household
economy. The systemization in the public economy of a people finds its
clearest expression in economic laws, and in the institutions of the
state. But it finds expression, also, without the intervention of the
state, in the laws established by use, and by the opinions of jurists or
courts, in community of speech, of customs and tastes etc.: things which
have an important economic meaning, which depend on the common nature of
the land, of race and history, and which influence the state, at least as
much as they are influenced by it.(116)(117)

The most that can be said, at present, so far as an economy of mankind, or
a world-economy, is concerned, is, that it may be shown that important
preparations have been made for it. We are approaching more nearly to it
by the ways of the more and more cosmopolitan character of science, the
increasing international coöperation of labor, the improvement in the
means of transportation, growing emigration, the greater love of peace,
and the greater toleration of nations etc.



                              Section XIII.


Political Economy.--The Economic Organism.


The idea conveyed by the word _organism_, is doubtless, one of the most
obscure of all ideas; and I am so far from desiring to explain(118) by
that idea, the meaning of public or national economy, that I would only
use the word _organism_ as the shortest and most familiar expression of a
number of problems, which it is the purpose of the following investigation
to solve.

There are two points, especially, of importance here. In the motion of any
machine, it is possible to distinguish with the utmost accuracy, between
the cause and the effect of the motion: the blowing of the wind, for
instance, is simply and purely, the cause of the friction of the
mill-stones in a wind-mill, and is not in the least influenced or
conditioned by the latter. But, in the public economy of every people,
patient thought soon shows the observer, that the most important
simultaneous events or phenomena mutually condition one another. Thus, a
flourishing state of agriculture is impossible without flourishing
industries; but, conversely, the prosperity of the latter supposes the
prosperity of the former, as a condition precedent. It is as in the human
body. The motions of respiration are produced by the action of the spinal
cord; and the spinal cord, in turn, continues to work only through the
blood, that is, by the help of respiration. In all cases like this, we are
forced, when accounting for phenomena, to move about in a circle, unless
we admit the existence of an organic life, of which every individual fact
is only the manifestation.(119)(120)

It is, also, undeniable, that human insight into the operation and utility
of a machine must always precede the existence of the machine itself. This
human insight is parent to the plan, and the plan, in turn, is parent to
the machine. The very reverse of this is true in the case of organisms,
those "divine machines" as Leibnitz called them. Men had digested food and
reproduced their kind, thousands of years before physiologists had
attained to a true theory of digestion or reproduction. I do not, indeed,
by any means, pretend, that the public economy of nations is governed by
natural necessity, in the same degree, as for instance, the human body. We
shall find, however, that the minute arbitrary variations usual here and
there in the course of its development, generally compensate for one
another, in accordance with the law of large numbers. Here, too, we find
harmonies, frequently of wonderful beauty, which existed long before any
one dreamt of them; innumerable _natural laws_,(121) whose operation does
not depend on their recognition by individuals, and, over which, only he
can obtain power who has learned to obey them. (_Bacon_)(122)(123)(124)
But it should never be lost sight of, that the natural laws governing the
public economy of a people, like those of the human mind, are
distinguished in one very essential point from those of the material
world. They have to do with free rational beings, who, because they are
thus free and rational, are responsible to God and their conscience, and
constitute in their aggregate a species capable of progress.



                               Section XIV.


Origin Of A Nation's Economy.


The public economy of a people has its origin simultaneously with the
people. It is neither the invention of man nor the revelation of God. It
is the natural product of the faculties and propensities which make man
man.(125) Just as it may be shown, that the family which lives isolated
from all others, contains, in itself, the germs of all political
organization,(126) so may it be demonstrated, that every independent
household management contains the germs of all politico-economical
activity. The public economy of a nation grows with the nation. With the
nation, it blooms and ripens. Its season of blossoming and of maturity is
the period of its greatest strength, and, at the same time, of the most
perfect development of all its more important organs.(127) In respect to
it, the economic endeavors of any epoch may be said to be represented by
two great parties, the one progressive, the other, conservative. The
former would hasten the period of the nation's richest and most varied
development, the latter postpone its departure as long as possible; and
hence it comes, that a people's economic decline is sometimes taken for
progress, by the former class, and their progress for decline, by the
latter. As a rule, the union and equilibrium of these parties are wont to
be the greatest at the period of maturity, because, then, intelligence and
the spirit of sacrifice for the common good are most general.(128)

Finally, the public economy of a nation declines with the people.
(_Infra_, § 263 ff.)



                               Section XV.


Diseases Of The Social Organism.


If the public economy of a people be an organism, we must expect to find
that the perturbations, which affect it, present some analogies to the
diseases of the body physical. We may, therefore, hope to learn much that
may be of use in practice, from the tried methods of medicine.(129) In the
diseases of the body economic, it is necessary to distinguish accurately,
between the nature of the disease and its external symptoms, although it
may be necessary to combat the latter directly, and not merely with a view
to alleviation. Following the example of the physician, we should
particularly direct our attention to the curative method which nature
itself would pursue, were art not to intervene. "The curative power of
nature is no peculiar power; it is the result of a series of happy
adjustments, by means of which the morbid perturbation itself sets in
motion the springs which may either destroy the evil or paralyze its
action. It is, in fact, nothing but the original power which formed the
body and preserves its life in contact with the external causes of
perturbation and the internal disorder provoked by these causes."
(_Ruete._)




                               Chapter II.


Position Of Political Economy In The Circle Of Related Sciences.



                               Section XVI.


Political Or National Economy.


By the science of national,(130) or Political Economy, we understand the
science which has to do with the laws of the development of the economy of
a nation, or with its economic national life. (Philosophy of the history
of Political Economy, according to von Mangoldt.) Like all the political
sciences, or sciences of _national life_, it is concerned, on the one
hand, with the consideration of the individual man, and on the other, it
extends its investigations to the whole of human kind.(131)

National life, like all life, is a whole, the various phenomena of which
are most intimately connected with one another. Hence it is, that to
understand one side of it scientifically, it is necessary to know all its
sides. But, especially, is it necessary to fix one's attention on the
following seven: language, religion, art, science, law, the state and
economy.(132) Without language, all higher mental activity is unthinkable;
without religion, all else would lose its firmest foundation and highest
aim. Through art, alone, do all these sides attain to beauty; through
science, alone, to clearness. Law arises, the moment conflicts of will
become inevitable and an adjustment is desired. The state has to do with
them, in so far as they have any external force or validity. Indeed, there
is no human relation, not even the highest and the sweetest, but has its
economic interests. It is, therefore, natural, that each of the sciences
which relate to these various regions of human life should, in part,
presuppose all others, and, in part, serve as a basis for them.(133)

But in the midst of this universal relationship, it is easy to see that
law, the state and economy constitute a family, as it were apart and more
closely connected. (The social sciences, in the narrower sense of the
expression.)

They are confined almost exclusively to what Schleiermacher has called
"effective action" (_wirksame Handeln_), while art and science belong
almost entirely to the "action of representation" (_darstellenden
Handeln_); and religion and language combine both kinds. Law, the state,
and economy too, have their roots so deep in the physical and intellectual
imperfection of man, that we can scarcely imagine their continuance beyond
his life on earth (Gospel of Matthew, 22, 30). But within these limits,
their several provinces and the subjects with which they are concerned are
almost coincident. They only consider these from different points of view:
the science of politics from that of sovereignty; the science of Political
Economy from that of the satisfaction of the requirement of external goods
by the people; the science of law from that of the prevention or the
peaceable adjustment of conflicts of will. As every economic act,
consciously or unconsciously, supposes forms of law, so, by far the
greater number of the laws relating to rights, and the greater number of
judgments in the matter of rights, contain an economic element. In
numberless cases, the science of law gives us only the external _how_; the
deeper _why_ is revealed to us by the science of Political
Economy.(134)(135) And, as to the state, who, for instance, can appreciate
the political significance of a nobility, without understanding the
economic character of rent, and of the possession of large landed estates?
Who can politically appreciate the inferior classes of society, unless
initiated into a knowledge of the laws that govern wages and population?
It were much easier to cultivate psychology without physiology! "The state
is society protected by force" (_Herbart_). There are two bases to all
material power:(136) wealth and warlike ability ({~GREEK SMALL LETTER CHI~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER RHO~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ETA WITH OXIA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER MU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}--{~GREEK SMALL LETTER NU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER UPSILON~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER TAU~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER IOTA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER KAPPA~}{~GREEK SMALL LETTER ALPHA WITH OXIA~},
according to Thucydides); and how much the latter has need of the former
is well expressed by the familiar saying of Montecuccoli: "Money is not
only the first, but the second and third condition of war."(137)

Frederick the Great calls finance the pulse of the state, and Richelieu,
the point of support which Archimedes was in search of, to move the world.
In all modern nations, the history of the debates on the raising of
revenue and of the passing of budgets is, at the same time, the history of
parliamentary life; and most great revolutions, the Reformation of the
sixteenth century not excepted, if not caused have been promoted, by
financial embarrassment.



                              Section XVII.


Sciences Relating To National Life.--The Science Of Public Economy.--The
Science Of Finance.


If, by the public economy of a nation, we understand economic legislation
and the governmental guidance or direction of the economy of private
persons,(138) the science of public economy becomes, so far as its form is
concerned, a branch of political science, while as to its matter, its
subject is almost coincident with that of Political Economy. Hence it is,
that so many writers use the terms public economy, or the economy of the
state (_Staatswirthschaft_), and National Economy (_Volkswirthschaft_), as
synonymous.(139) The hypothesis, in accordance with which, this science
should discard all consideration of the state, or should refuse to
presuppose its formation,(140) would lead us into an ideal region,
difficult to define, probably entirely impossible, and inaccessible to
experience.

Just as clear, is the close connection between politics and Political
Economy, in the case of the science of finance, or of the science of
governmental house-keeping, otherwise the administration of public
affairs. The latter, evidently, so far as its end is concerned, belongs to
politics, but so far as the means to that end are concerned, to National
Economy. As the physiologist cannot understand the action of the human
body, without understanding that of the head; so we would not be able to
grasp the organic whole of national economy, if we were to leave the
state, the greatest economy of all, the one which uninterruptedly and
irresistibly acts on all others, out of consideration.(141)

By the term _police_, we mean the state power whose office it is, without
mediation, to prevent all disturbances of external order among the
people.(142) It may extend its action into all the domains of national
life mentioned above, whenever external order is there threatened, or
calls for protection; but its action is important especially in the
domains of law and economy. The science of the _police power_, therefore,
of all those doctrines resulting from investigation into national life,
takes up only one phase of each of them; and the phases of doctrine thus
taken up, it combines into a whole, for practical ends. Its relation to
those sciences is like that of surgery to the medical sciences, or like
the science of legal procedure to the science of law.



                              Section XVIII.


Sciences Relating To National Life.--Statistics.


Statistics we call the picture or representation of social life at given
periods of time, and especially at the present time, drawn on a scale in
accordance with the laws of development discovered by means of the
theoretical sciences above named; as it were, a section through the
stream. (_Schlözer_ calls them: history standing still.)(143) Statistics,
as thus defined, are as far removed from saying too much as from saying
too little. To give a complete tableau of their object, statistics should,
of course, take in the life of a people, in all its aspects. But they
should look upon such facts only as their own property, the meaning of
which they are able to understand; that is, such only as can be ranged
under known laws of development. Unintelligible facts are collected only
in the hope of penetrating into their meaning in the future, by comparing
them with one another. In the meantime, they are to the statistician only
what unfinished experiments are to the investigator of nature.

The view is daily gaining ground, that statistics should be
occupied--without, however, confining themselves to them--with present
facts, with "facts affecting society and the state, which are susceptible
of being expressed in figures."(144) The more deceptive the immediate
observation of an individual, isolated fact is, in cases where a great
number of simultaneous or scattered individual isolated facts of national
life should be observed, the more important it is to discover proper
numerical relations, by noting all the like acts or experiences of men,
the time and place in question, and the relation of the aggregate of these
phenomena, to the sum-total of the population, or to the sum-total of
corresponding phenomena in other places. When this is done, and the facts
are completely enumerated and correctly recorded, there is no danger of
subjective error. And this species of "political and social measuring," as
Hildebrand calls it, may be applied, not only to quantities, but to all
qualities accessible to the observation of the senses; since the
individual or isolated qualities of the things enumerated, may be again
made objects of enumeration. Without doubt, this mode of numerical
procedure is the most perfect for all those divisions of statistics in
which it can be followed; and hence, it should be our endeavor to make the
numerical side of statistics as comprehensive as possible. But, one side
of a science is not a science itself. As there is no natural science
proper called microscopy, embracing all the observations made by means of
the microscope, so care should be taken not to deduce the principle of a
science from the chief instrument it employs. There will always be many
and important facts in national life which can not be subjected to
numerical calculation, although they may be established with the usual
amount of historical certainty. Were statistics to be limited, in the
manner mentioned above, they would remain a collection of fragments, and
instead of being a science, properly so-called, become a method.(145)

Besides, it is evident, that, of statistics in general, economic
statistics constitute a chief part, and precisely the part most accessible
to numerical treatment. As these economic statistics need to be always
directed by the light of Political Economy, they also furnish it with rich
materials for the continuation of its structure, and for the strengthening
of such foundations as it already has. They, are, moreover, the
indispensable condition of the application of economic theorems to
practice.



                               Section XIX.


Private Economy--Cameralistic Science.


The meaning of the term cameralistic science (_Cameralwissenschaft_) can
be explained only by the history of the cameralistic system.(146) From the
end of the middle ages, we find, in most German countries, an institution
called the Council (_Kammer_) whose province it was to administer the
public domain, and to watch over regal rights. At first, a mere
governmental commission, it was not long before it developed into an
independent board. This change had taken place in Burgundy as early as the
year 1409. It was in that country that the emperor Maximilian became
acquainted with the institution; and by the erection of the aulic councils
at Innspruck and Vienna (1498 and 1501), he gave the principal impulse to
the imitation of it in Germany. As, at that time, the division of labor
was very little developed, and personal and collegial authority all the
more developed in consequence, it is easy to conceive that a great part of
all the new and rapidly increasing business of police administration was
confided to these councils. They were charged especially with what is
known to-day as economic police (_Wirthschaftspolizei_) and an important
part of the administration of justice, in its lower departments, was
turned over to their subordinates. The most eminent men who wrote, in the
seventeenth century, on cameralistic matters, laid great stress on the
point, that it was the duty of the aulic councils to entertain not only
fiscal questions, but that it was within their province also, to determine
questions of economic police.(147) The interest of absolute princes must
have greatly favored these cameralistic institutions, for they were in
their hands docile tools, which escaped the annoying intervention of the
states of their realms.

By degrees, the knowledge necessary to these council officials, and which
found no place in the lectures on law, were formed into a special body of
doctrine. After such men as Morhof and Thomasius had prepared the
way,(148) Frederick William I., himself a clever cameralist, and author of
the masterly financial system of Prussia, took the important step of
founding, at Halle and Frankfurt on the Oder, special chairs of economy
and cameralistic science; which, considering the time, were very ably
filled by Gasser and Dithmar. (1727.) There was thus formed in the German
universities a distinct school of cameralists, which, through Jung, Rössig
and Schmalz, reached to the nineteenth century. The term cameralistic
science, the creature of chance, was used, it must be said, with very
various limits to its meaning.(149)

However, Political Economy in Germany developed out of the science of law
and the cameralistic sciences, while in England and Italy it had its
origin chiefly in the study of questions of finance and foreign commerce.



                               Section XX.


Private Economy. (Continued.)


If we abstract from cameralistic science as it was understood in the last
century, what it has in common with all economy,(150) and therefore with
public economy, next that which belongs to the aggregate of governmental
economy, there remains only a number of rules, such as those which govern
the principal branches of private business, and which indicate how they
are to be carried on with the greatest advantage to those who engage in
them. Such are forest and rural economy, mining science, technology,
including architecture, and all that concerns founderies, and commercial
science. Now that the expression cameralistic science is altogether
obsolete, the aggregate of these might be designated by the name private
economy. Obviously, we should have here, neither a simple nor pure
science, but only a compilation of natural-philosophical and economic
lemmas. Thus, in agriculture, for instance, a knowledge of the different
kinds of soil, of the tillage of land, of the different plants and animals
etc., belongs to the domain of natural science; while all that relates to
the cost of production, the employment of capital, the wages of labor, the
exchange of products, net product and the price of land, are purely
politico-economical. The political economists also require a knowledge of
the natural side of the cameralistic sciences. Such a knowledge is
indispensable to every detailed and living theory, and especially to the
application of economic science to practice. The great difference lies in
this, that the cameralist interests himself in the production of material
goods for their own sake, while the political economist regards them only
in their relations to national life.(151)

It would seem, moreover, that political economists, especially in Germany,
have attached too much importance to putting formal bounds to their
special science. Why not rather follow the example of the students of
nature who care little whether this or that discovery belongs to physics
or chemistry, to astronomy or mathematics, provided, only, very many and
important discoveries are made?(152)



                               Section XXI.


What Political Economy Treats Of.


Political Economy treats chiefly of the material interests of nations. It
inquires how the various wants of the people of a country, especially
those of food, clothing, fuel, shelter, of the sexual instinct etc., may
be satisfied; how the satisfaction of these wants influences the aggregate
national life, and how in turn, they are influenced by the national life.
(Gospel of Matth., 4, 4.) This alone suffices to enable us to estimate the
importance of the science. The relation of virtue to wealth is likened by
Bacon to that of an army to its baggage. In Xenophon's opinion, wealth is
really useful only to him who knows how to make a good use of it. From an
economic point of view, the happiest man is he who has accumulated most,
honorably, and used it best.(153) That, even in a material sense, the
intellect of a people is their most important element, is evident from the
example of the Chinese, who were so long acquainted with printing, powder,
and the mariner's compass, without, by their means, attaining to
intelligent public opinion, forming a good army, or coming to an
understanding of the art of navigation, to any great extent.

The undervaluing of economic matters, for which ages of inferior
cultivation, our own middle ages for instance, are now praised and now
blamed, was really a rare exception even during these ages.(154) Other
kinds of acquisition and enjoyment then occupied the foreground; but there
never was a time, when gain and enjoyment in general were not favorite
objects of pursuit, and held in high esteem. The physical wants of
uncultured men cry out much louder than intellectual ones. (§ 2, 14.)(155)
On the other hand, in over-cultivated ages, when decay begins, an
over-estimation of material things is wont to become general.(156) The
mere servants of mammon, whether as political economists or as private
individuals, may see their depravity faithfully reflected in communism as
in a mirror. We should not overlook the fact that it is with whole nations
as with the individual man who amasses his own fortune. He reaches the
culminating point of his wealth generally after he has passed the prime of
life. The most flourishing period of a nation's existence is wont just to
precede its decay, and to introduce it.(157) Hence, here nothing could be
more untrue, as Macchiavelli has remarked, than the general opinion that
money is the sinew of war.(158)




                               Chapter III.


The Methods Of Political Economy.



                              Section XXII.


Former Methods.


The methods(159) which would apply to any science of national life,
principles borrowed from any other science, are now generally looked upon
as obsolete. This is true, especially, of the theological method which
prevailed, almost exclusively during the middle ages,(160) and of the
juridical method of the seventeenth century.

It would be much more in harmony with the intellectual tendencies of the
time, to adopt a mathematical mode of treatment in Political Economy,
involving, as such a mode of treatment does, not the matter of the
science, but only a formal principle. That which is general in Political
Economy has, it must be acknowledged, much that is analogous to the
mathematical sciences. Like the latter, it swarms with abstractions.(161)
Just as there are, strictly speaking, no mathematical lines or points in
nature, and no mathematical lever, there is nowhere such a thing as
production or rent, entirely pure and simple. The mathematical laws of
motion operate in a hypothetical vacuum, and, where applied, are subjected
to important modifications, in consequence of atmospheric resistance.
Something similar is true of most of the laws of our science; as, for
instance, those in accordance with which the price of commodities is fixed
by the buyer and seller. It also, always supposes the parties to the
contract to be guided only by a sense of their own best interest, and not
to be influenced by secondary considerations. It is not, therefore, to be
wondered at, that many authors have endeavored to clothe the laws of
Political Economy in algebraic formulæ.(162) And, indeed, wherever
magnitudes and the relations of magnitudes to one another are treated of,
it must be possible to subject them to calculation. Herbart has shown that
this is so in the case of psychology;(163) and all the sciences which
treat of national life, especially our own, are psychological.(164) But
the advantages of the mathematical mode of expression diminish as the
facts to which it is applied become more complicated. This is true even in
the ordinary psychology of the individual. How much more, therefore, in
the portraying of national life! Here the algebraic formulæ would soon
become so complicated, as to make all further progress in the operation
next to impossible.(165) Their employment, especially in a science whose
sphere it is, at present, to increase the number of the facts observed, to
make them the object of exhaustive investigation, and vary the
combinations into which they may be made to enter, is a matter of great
difficulty, if not entirely impossible.(166) For, most assuredly, as our
science has to do with men, it must take them and treat them as they
actually are, moved at once by very different and non-economic motives,
belonging to an entirely definite people, state, age etc. The abstraction
according to which all men are by nature the same, different only in
consequence of a difference of education, position in life etc., all
equally well equipped, skillful and free in the matter of economic
production and consumption, is one which, as Ricardo and von Thünen have
shown, must pass as an indispensable stage in the preparatory labors of
political economists. It would be especially well, when an economic fact
is produced by the cooperation of many different factors, for the
investigator to mentally isolate the factor of which, for the time being,
he wishes to examine the peculiar nature. All other factors should, for a
time, be considered as not operating, and as unchangeable, and then the
question asked, What would be the effect of a change in the factor to be
examined, whether the change be occasioned by enlarging or diminishing it?
But it never should be lost sight of, that such a one is only an
abstraction after all, for which, not only in the transition to practice,
but even in finished theory, we must turn to the infinite variety of real
life.(167)

There are two important inquiries in all sciences whose subject matter is
national or social life: 1. What _is_? (What has been? How did it become
so? etc.) 2. What _should be_? The greater number of political economists
have confounded these questions one with the other, but not all to the
same extent.(168)

When a careful distinction is made between them, the contrast between the
(realistic) physiological or historical, and the idealistic methods is
brought out.(169)



                              Section XXIII.


The Idealistic Method.


Any one who has read a goodly number of idealistic works treating of
public economy (the state, law etc.) cannot have failed to be struck by
the enormous differences, and even contradictions, as to what theorizers
have considered desirable and necessary. There is scarcely an important
point which the highest authorities may not be cited for or against. We
must not close our eyes to this fact. "The giddiness that comes from
contemplating the depths of knowledge is the beginning of philosophy, as
the god Thaumas was, according to the fable, the father of Iris."
(_Plato._) In a precisely similar manner, the student of public economy
(politics, the philosophy of law etc.) must familiarize himself with the
variations that have taken place in what men, at different periods of
history, have required of the state and public economy, until he is lost
in wonder at the contemplation.



                              Section XXIII.


The Idealistic Method. (Continued.)


It is impossible to fail to notice at once that those ideal descriptions
which have enjoyed great fame and exerted great influence, depart very
little from the real conditions of the public economy (of the state, law
etc.) surrounding their authors.(170) This is not mere chance. The power
of great theorizers, as, indeed, of all great men, lies, as a rule, in
this, that they satisfy the want of their own time to an unusual extent;
and it is the peculiar task of theorizers to give expression to this want
with scientific clearness, and to justify it with scientific depth. But
the real wants of a people will, in the long run, be satisfied in
life,(171) so far as this is possible to the moral imperfection of man. We
should at least be on our guard when we hear it said that whole nations
have been forced into an "unnatural" course by priests, tyrants and
cavilers. For, to leave human freedom and divine Providence out of
consideration entirely, how is such a thing possible? The supposed tyrants
are generally part and parcel of the people themselves; all their
resources are derived from the people. They must have been new
Archimedeses standing outside of their own world. (Compare, however,
_infra_, § 263.)

It is true, that if the result of the growth of generations be to
gradually produce a different people, these different men may require
different institutions. Then a struggle arises between the old and those
of the younger generation; the former wish to retain what has been tested
by time, the latter to seek for the satisfaction of their new wants by new
means. As the sea always oscillates between the flowing and ebbing of the
tides, so the life of nations, between periods of repose and of crisis:
periods of repose, when existing forms answer to the real substance of
things, and of crisis, when the changed substance or contents seeks to
build up a new form for itself. Such crises are called _reforms_ when they
are effected in a peaceful way, and in accordance with positive law. When
accomplished in violation of law, they are called revolutions.(172)

That every revolution, it matters not how great the need of the change
produced by it, is as such an enormous evil, a serious, and sometimes,
fatal disease of the body politic, is self-evident. The injury to morals
which the spectacle of victorious wrong almost always produces can be
healed, as a rule, only in the following generation. Where law has been
once trampled on, the "right of the stronger" will prevail; and the
stronger is, to some extent, the most unscrupulous and reckless in the
choice of the means to be employed. Hence, the well-known fact, that in
revolutionary times the worst so frequently remain the victors. The
counter-revolution which is wont to follow on the heels of revolution, and
with a corresponding violence, is a compensation only to the most
shortsighted. It allows the disease, the familiarizing of the people with
the infringement of law, to continue, until the hitherto sound parts are
attacked. Hence, a people should, if they would have it go well with them,
in the changes in the form of things which they make, take as their model
Time, whose reforms are the surest and most irresistible, but, at the same
time, as Bacon says, so gradual that they cannot be seen or observed at
any one moment. It is true, that, as all that is great is difficult, so
also is the carrying out of uninterrupted reform. Its carrying out,
indeed, supposes two things: a constitution so wisely planned as to keep
the doors open both to the disappearing institutions of the past and to
the coming institutions of the future; and, among all classes of the
people, a moral control of themselves, so absolute that, no matter what
the inconvenience, or how great the sacrifice, legal ways shall alone be
used. In this manner, two of the greatest and apparently most
contradictory wants of every legal or moral person, the want of
uninterrupted continuity and that of free development, may be satisfied.



                               Section XXV.


The Idealistic Method. (Continued.)


It is doubtless true that all economic laws, and all economic institutions
are made for the people, not the people for such laws and institutions.
Their mutability is, therefore, by no means such an evil as mankind should
endeavor to remove, but is wholesome and laudable, so far as it runs
parallel with the transformation of the people, and the changes which
their wants have undergone.(173) Hence, there is no reason why the most
various ideal systems should contradict one another. Any one of them may
be right, but, of course, only for one people and one age. In this case,
the only error would be, if they should claim to be universally
applicable. There can no more be an economic ideal adapted to the various
wants of every people, than a garment which should fit every individual.
The leading-strings of children and the staff of age would be great
annoyances to the man. "Reason becomes nonsense and beneficence a
torment." Hence, whoever would elaborate the ideal of the best public
economy--and the greater number of political economists have really wished
to do this--should, if he would be perfectly true, and at the same time
practical, place in juxta position as many different ideals as there are
different types of people.(174) He would, moreover, have to revise his
work every few years; for, in proportion as a people change, and new wants
originate, the economic ideal suitable to them must change also. But it is
impossible to accomplish this on so large a scale. Besides, to appreciate
the present thus instantaneously, and to perfectly feel the pulse of time
thus uninterruptedly, requires a species of talent different from what
even the most distinguished scientists are wont to possess; talents of an
entirely practical nature, such as become a great minister of the interior
or of finance. And it is an acknowledged fact, that even the cleverest of
such practicioners, as the younger Pitt said of himself, generally feel
their way instinctively, and do not see it with the clearness necessary to
indicate it to others.



                              Section XXVI.


The Historical Method--The Anatomy And Physiology Of Public Economy.


We refuse entirely to lend ourselves in theory to the construction of such
ideal systems. Our aim is simply to describe man's economic nature and
economic wants, to investigate the laws and the character of the
institutions which are adapted to the satisfaction of these wants, and the
greater or less amount of success by which they have been attended.(175)
Our task is, therefore, so to speak, the anatomy and physiology of social
or national economy!

These are matters to be found within the domain of reality, susceptible of
demonstration or refutation by the ordinary operations of science;
entirely true or entirely false, and, therefore, in the former case, not
liable to become obsolete. We proceed after the manner of the investigator
of nature. We, too, have our dissecting knife and microscope, and we have
an advantage over the student of nature in this, that the self-observation
of the body is exceedingly limited, while that of mind is almost
unlimited. There are other respects, however, in which he has the
advantage over us. When he wishes to study a given species, he may make a
hundred or a thousand experiments, and use a hundred or a thousand
individuals for his purpose. Hence, he can easily control each separate
observation, and distinguish the exception from the rule. But, how many
nations are there which we can make use of for purposes of comparison?
Their very fewness makes it all the more imperative to compare them all.
Doubtless, comparison cannot supply the place of observation; but
observation may be thus rendered more thorough, many-sided, and richer in
the number of its points of view. Interested alike in the differences and
resemblances, we must first form our rules from the latter, consider the
former as the exceptions, and then endeavor to explain them. (_Infra_, §
266).



                              Section XXVII.


Advantages Of The Historical Or Physiological Method.


The thorough application of this method will do away with a great number
of controversies on important questions.(176) Men are as far removed from
being devils as from being angels. We meet with few who are only guided by
ideal motives, but with few, also, who hearken only to the voice of
egotism, and care for nothing but themselves. It may, therefore, be
assumed, that any view current on certain tangible interests which concern
man very nearly, and which has been shared by great parties and even by
whole peoples for generations, is not based only on ignorance or a
perverse love of wrong. The error consists more frequently in applying
measures wholesome and even absolutely necessary under certain
circumstances, to circumstances entirely different. And here, a thorough
insight into the conditions of the measure suffices to compose the
differences between the two parties. Once the natural laws of Political
Economy are sufficiently known and recognized, all that is needed, in any
given instance, is more exact and reliable statistics of the fact
involved, to reconcile all party controversies on questions of the
politics of public economy, so far, at least, as these controversies arise
from a difference of opinion. It may be that science may never attain to
this, in consequence of the new problems which are ever arising and
demanding a solution. It may be, too, that in the greater number of party
controversies, the opposed purposes of the parties play a more important
part even than the opposed views. Be this as it may, it is necessary,
especially in an age as deeply agitated as our own, when every good
citizen is in duty bound to ally himself to party, that every honest
party-man should seek to secure, amid the ocean of ephemeral opinions, a
firm island of scientific truth, as universally recognized as truth as are
the principles of mathematical physics by physicians of the most various
schools.



                             Section XXVIII.


Advantages Of The Historical Method. (Continued.)


Another characteristic feature of the historical method is that it does
away with the feeling of self-sufficiency, and the braggadocio which cause
most men to ridicule what they do not understand, and the higher to look
down with contempt on lower civilizations. Whoever is acquainted with the
laws of the development of the plant, cannot fail to see in the seed the
germ of its growth, and in its flower, the herald of decay. If there were
inhabitants of the moon, and one of them should visit our earth, and find
children and grown people side by side, while ignorant of the laws of
human development, would he not look upon the most beautiful child as a
mere monster, with an enormous head, with arms and legs of stunted growth,
useless genitals, and destitute of reason? The folly of such a judgment
would be obvious to every one; and yet we meet with thousands like it on
the state and the public economy of nations when in lower stages of
civilization, and this, even among the most distinguished writers.(177)

We may, indeed, make a critical comparison of different forms, each of
which answers perfectly to its object or contents; but such a comparison
can possess historical objectivity, only when it is based on a correct
view of the peculiar course of development followed by the people in
question.

The forms of the period of maturity may be considered the most perfect;
earlier forms as the immature, and the later as those of the age of
decline.(178) But it is a matter of the greatest difficulty, accurately to
determine the culminating point of a people's civilization. The old man
believes, as a rule, that the times are growing worse, because he is no
longer in a way to utilize them; the young man, as a rule, that they are
growing better, because he hopes to turn them to account. It is, however,
always a purely empirical question; and in the solution of it, the
observer's eye may acquire a singular acuteness by the comparative study
of as many nations as possible, especially of those which have already
passed away.(179)

Could anyone contemplate the history of mankind as a a whole, of which the
histories of individual nations are but the parts, the successive steps in
the evolution of humanity would of course afford him a similar objective
rule for all these points in which whole peoples permanently differ from
one another.(180)



                              Section XXIX.


The Practical Character Of The Historical Method In Political Economy.


Before I close, I must refer to a possible objection which may be made to
historical or physiological Political Economy: that it may indeed be
taught, but that it cannot be a practical science. If it be assumed that
those principles only are practical, which may be applied immediately by
every reader, in practice, this work must disclaim all pretensions to that
title. I doubt very much if, in this sense, there is a single science
susceptible of a practical exposition.(181) Genuine practitioners, who
know life with its thousands of relations by experience, will be the first
to grant that such a collection of prescriptions, when the question is the
knowledge and guidance of men, would be misleading and dangerous in
proportion as such prescriptions were positive and apodictic, that is
non-practical and doctrinarian.

Our endeavor has been, not to write a practical book, but to train our
readers to be practical. To this end, we have sought to describe the laws
of nature which man cannot control, but, at most, only utilize. We call
the attention of the reader to the different points of view, from which
every economic fact must be observed, to do justice to every claim. We
would like to accustom the reader, when he is examining the most
insignificant politico-economical fact, never to lose sight of the whole,
not only of public economy but of national life. We are very strongly of
the opinion, that only he can form a correct judgment and defend his views
against all objections, on such questions as to where, how and when
certain liens and charges, monopolies, privileges, services etc., should
be abolished, who fully understands why they were once imposed or
introduced. Especially, do we not desire to impress a certain number of
rules of action on those who have confided themselves to our guidance,
after having first demonstrated their excellence. Our highest ambition is
to put our readers in a way to discover such rules of direction for
themselves, after they have conscientiously weighed all the facts,
untrammeled by any earthly authority whatever.(182)(183)





                                 Book I.


THE PRODUCTION OF GOODS.




                                Chapter I.


Factors Of Production.



                               Section XXX.


Meaning Of Production.


To create new matter is more than it is given to man to do. Hence, by the
term production, in its widest sense, we mean simply the bringing forth of
new goods--the discovery of new utilities, the change or transformation of
already existing goods into new utilities,(184) the creation of means for
the satisfaction of human wants, out of the aggregate of matter originally
present in the world. (_Producere!_) We confine ourselves, however, in
this to economic goods, as defined in § 2. In a secondary and more limited
sense, production is an increase of resources, in so far as the goods
produced satisfy a greater human want, than those employed in the
production itself.(185)(186)(187)

It would, however, be an error to suppose, that the creation of certain
utilities for the producer himself, or for others, constitutes the only
end of economic production. The more perfect economic production becomes,
the greater grows the pleasure the producer feels in his products, which
pleasure is at once the effect and the cause of his success. Hence,
production is to a great extent its own end. That this is so in the case
of artists is well known. "If you want only progeny from her, a mortal can
beget them as well. Let him who rejoices in the goddess, not seek in her
the woman," says Schiller. There is not a really clever workman but has
something artistic in his mode of production. And even the meanest
productive activity, provided it is neither over-driven nor misdirected,
must of itself exert a good influence on the physical and moral
development or preservation of the producer. An idle brain is the devil's
workshop.(188)



                              Section XXXI.


The Factors Of Production.--External Nature.(189)


The division of natural forces which formerly obtained, into organic,
chemical and mechanical, is of no great importance in Political Economy.
The tendency is more and more to resolve organic forces partly into
chemical and partly into mechanical. Between mechanical and chemical
forces, again, the boundary is not fixed, heat being always capable of
producing motion, and motion always of producing heat. Hence, it is all
the more important for us to find a division of the economic gifts
(matter, forces(190) and relations) of external nature, into such as are
capable of acquiring exchange value, and such as are not. (See § 5.)

A. Those gifts of nature which, because they cannot be appropriated by any
one, or which at least are inexhaustible as compared with the wants of
man, and therefore never have a direct value in exchange, belong either to
the class of _free_ goods, in the fullest sense of the word, as, for
instance, sunlight and the atmosphere (_supra_, § 5);(191) or they
constitute, by reason of their peculiar and intransmissible connection
with the whole country, an essential element of the national resources.



                              Section XXXII.


External Nature.--The Sea.--Climate.


To the last category belongs, for instance, the sea, the only natural
boundary of a country, which from a military point of view, constitutes a
protection to it, without, at the same time, disturbing peaceful traffic.
(_Riedel._) Here, also belong ocean currents, especially when uniformly
supported by regular winds,(192) the ebb and flow of the tides, which
constitute a piece of commercial machinery of the very greatest
importance, particularly when they affect the waters of rivers to a great
distance.(193) In this age, when the love of travel is so great and so
universal, what prices are paid in many places by strangers for the beauty
of a landscape, to its owner.

Special mention should be here made of climate, and of its heat or
moisture. The lines called isothermal, that is, lines of equal annual
heat, are, therefore, of greatest importance to public economy, because
the "zones of production" depend mainly on them.(194) However, we are
concerned here, not only with the average temperature of the whole year,
but especially with the distribution of heat among the several parts of
the day and the different seasons of the year, and the maximum summer heat
and winter cold (the isothermal and iso-cheimenal lines). Coast lands are
wont to have a milder winter and a cooler summer than continental ones
with an equal average yearly heat. This produces a great difference in
vegetation, because there are a great many plants which can endure the
winter's cold very well, but require a hot summer; and _vice versa_.(195)
Were it not for this fact, in connection with the winter-sleep of plants,
a large portion of the north would be entirely uninhabitable. Besides, the
temperature of a place does not depend exclusively on its latitude, or on
its height above the sea-level.(196) The humidity of the climate is, as a
rule, great in proportion to the quantity of water in its neighborhood,
and to the height of its temperature; although, for instance, in Europe,
the number of rainy days increases, the further we advance towards the
north.(197) Although the distance of a place from the equator and its
height above the level of the sea have, in many respects, a similar effect
(vertical, horizontal isothermal lines and zones of production),
mountainous regions are uniformly distinguished by a greater degree of
humidity, which makes them better adapted for pasturage and
forest-culture. But the flora of a locality, being the resultant of all
its conditions, affords us a much better criterion of the value of the
climate for economic purposes, than the most accurate thermometric
observations. Other things being equal, the productive force of nature
operates, doubtless, with most energy, in warm climates. The more remote a
country is from the equator, the more is its fertility confined to its
lowest parts.(198) Greater heat will, as a rule, ripen the same product
sooner, and thus permit the same land to be used several times in the same
year.(199) Each individual harvest, as a rule, is more abundant,(200) and
the products better in many respects. The fruit, for instance, and wine,
contain more sugar,(201) and oleaginous plants contain more oil. Lastly,
since nature in warm countries is so much more generous, it may be
utilized by man with less regard for consequences. There is less need of
extensive woods, of large winter supplies, especially for animals;(202)
fewer buildings are demanded, and there is also less demand for human and
brute labor, since the work of plowing, sowing etc., extends over a
greater portion of the year.(203) It is true, on the other hand, that also
the destructive force of nature is greater in warmer than in colder
countries. (§ 209.)(204)



                             Section XXXIII.


External Nature.--Gifts Of Nature With Value In Exchange.


B. Those gifts of external nature which may become objects of private
property, and at the same time possess sufficient relative scarcity to
give them value in exchange, are either movable, and exhaustible in a
given place, or firmly connected with the land. The first category
embraces, for instance, such wild animals and plants as serve some useful
purpose, minerals, above all, fossil combustible matter(205)--the "black
diamonds," coal, of which, with its canals, Franklin said that it had made
England what it is. The economical effect of their moveable character is
best seen, when the use made of an ordinary stratum of coal is compared
with that of a protracted subterranean fire in a coal mine.(206) The
latter can be directly useful only to those in its immediate vicinity.
Every lower layer of the burning coal would be less useful. An increase of
its actual power by accumulation in time or place is scarcely possible. In
all these respects, the movable coal is incomparably better adapted to the
satisfaction of man's wants. It may be said that the capacity of heat for
drying, distilling, melting and hardening purposes, of imparting rapid
motion to heavy objects by the production of confined steam, is, at least,
a thousand times as great when a thousand bushels of coal are consumed as
when one is consumed. In most cases even the concentration of a large
quantity of coal will increase, the result not only absolutely, but
relatively.(207)(208)



                              Section XXXIV.


External Nature. (Continued.)


The materials, forces and relations or conditions of external nature,
immovably connected with parts of the land, even when in themselves
exhaustless, either allow only of a definite amount of economic
utilization, as, for instance, the mechanical force of a given waterfall,
which can drive only a definite number of mills of a definite size;(209)
or their increased utilization is accompanied by difficulties which
increase with still greater rapidity. This last is the case, especially in
the employment of land for agricultural purposes. It is, according to
Senior, one of the four fundamental axioms of Political Economy, that
additional labor, spent on a given quantity of land, produces, as a rule,
a relatively smaller yield; assuming, of course, that the art of
agriculture remains the same. It is not possible to determine either
generally, or in particular cases, the precise point at which agriculture
should stop, to prevent relatively smaller returns from increased
expenditure of labor and capital. Improvements in the art of agriculture
may remove it a great distance. But, that there is such a point admits of
no doubt. No one will believe that an acre of land can be made to produce
a quantity of the means of subsistence sufficient to support all Europe,
no matter what the amount of seed used, or of manure etc. employed.(210)
This is most apparent in forest-economy, where the absolute increase of
the so-called wood-capital becomes, after a certain time, smaller from
year to year.(211)



                              Section XXXV.


External Nature.--Elements Of Agricultural Productiveness.


In treating of the agricultural productiveness of a piece of land, it is
necessary to distinguish three things,--its bearing-capacity, its capacity
for cultivation, and its direct capacity to afford food to plants.(212)
Plants grow by drawing a part of the elements which enter into their
composition from the atmosphere, and a part from the earth through the
agencies of sunlight and of water. While the air, the sun's heat, and in
most parts of the world, water, are free and inexhaustible goods, the
earth's supply of food for plants must be considered as analogous, so far
as its exhaustibility and capacity to be appropriated are concerned, to
the beds of coal and of ore etc. which occur in mining districts. This is
certainly true, with a few important differences, however, as for
instance, that, as a rule, it is impossible, except through the
cultivation of plants, to obtain from the earth the stores of plant food
which it contains;(213) and that it is possible to husbandry to replace
the portion of these stores taken from the earth by the harvest, through
the agency of manures.(214)

Incomparably more important in the economic valuation of a piece of land
is its capacity for cultivation, because this depends much less on the
good or bad quality of the husbandman's art. I mean here the so-called
physical constitution of the vegetable soil; its water-holding power, its
consistency (light or heavy soil) on which the difficulty of working it
depends; its ability to dry, in a shorter or longer time, and its
accompanying diminution in volume; its ability to draw moisture from the
atmosphere and to absorb the various kinds of gases; its heat-absorbing
and heat-containing power (hot, warm and cold soils).(215) Much depends
here on the depth of the vegetable soil and on the constitution of the
sub-soil, which, for instance, when it is very permeable, improves a very
moist soil, but in the form of meadow iron-ore (_Wiesenerz_), works great
injury. The vertical form of the land is also a very important element in
estimating the natural fertility of the soil. In mountainous districts,
the quantity of land which can be used (and with what labor!) is wont to
be relatively smaller than in low lands. Hence it is, that the former
become too small for their inhabitants; who, therefore, swarm over the
plains lying before them either as settlers or conquerors.(216) In the
eastern hemisphere, the northern slopes of mountain regions are most
unfavorably situated, although the southern slopes are frequently
subjected to more trying and more sudden variations of thawing and
freezing weather.(217)

But all these more special qualities of the soil must be distinguished
from their general basis, the bearing or carrying capacity which land
possesses as a mere superficies, and which the most naked rock (Malta!),
and the bed of a flowing stream (the floating gardens of China!) possess
to some extent, since there is a possibility of establishing a
plant-feeding surface on them. This bearing capacity, which in most
instances is given only by nature, and which can be added to only to a
very limited extent and at great outlay, is wont, when the population is
very dense, to acquire considerable exchange value in the
vicinity.(218)(219)



                              Section XXXVI.


External Nature.--Further Divisions Of Nature's Gifts.


The gifts of nature, we further divide into those which can be directly
enjoyed and those which are of use only indirectly, by facilitating
production. (Natural means of enjoyment,--means of acquisition.)(220) An
extreme superfluity of the former is as disastrous to civilization as a
too great scarcity of them. How simple the economy of a tropical country!
A banana field will support twenty-five times as many men as a wheat field
(_K. Ritter_); and with infinitely less labor; for all that is needed is
to cut the stems with their ripened fruit, to loosen the earth a little
and very superficially, when new stems shoot up.(221) At the base of the
mountains of Mexico, a father needs labor only two days in the week to
support his family. Hence, nothing so much excites the wonder of the
traveler there as the diminutiveness of the cultivated ground surrounding
each Indian hut.(222) But in these earthly paradises, where, as Byron
said, even bread is gathered like fruit, the powers of man slumber as
certainly as they grow torpid in polar deserts.(223) The sentence: "In the
sweat of thy brow shalt thou eat bread," has been a blessing to mankind.
Athens was not only the literary and political, but also the economic
capital of Greece; and yet Attica was one of the most sterile countries in
the world.(224) Unfortunate Messina, on the other hand, was the most
fertile province of Greece. In modern times, no countries of equal extent
have produced as many great captains, statesmen, savants and artists as
Holland, whose securest portions are as unfertile as those which are
fertile are threatened by the sea. On the other hand, how lately and
imperfectly has the so-called black-earth of southern Russia fallen under
the influence of civilization!(225)



                             Section XXXVII.


External Nature.--The Geographical Character Of A Country.


The geographical character of a country is, as a rule,(226) most
intimately connected, not only with its flora and fauna, but also with the
character of its people. One of the crowning glories of the progress of
modern science is, that it has recognized anew the power of this wonderful
organism, and that it has made geography an explanatory medium between
nature and history. The conditions most favorable to the development of
civilization are found in a well developed country which slopes gradually
through a series of intermediate terraces from a mountain summit to a
plain; especially when they are connected with one another by a good
system of streams; since here the opposite peculiarities of the
populations of the highlands and coast-lands(227) tend to produce a
nationality both one and varied. Where the transitions are too abrupt, as
for instance, in New Holland, they easily impede inter-communication; and,
still more, where the several parts of the country are of very great
extent; as, for example, the desert of North Africa, the plateau of South
Africa or that of Central Asia. Europe is favored above all other parts of
the world by the happy combination of mountain and plain.(228) We might
pursue the parallel existing between the soil and the character of a
people into the minutest details, and discover, even in the difference
between Spanish, French, German and Hungarian wines, a reflection of the
different characters of the people.(229)

But whence is this? Can it be that dead nature has thus irresistibly
affected the living mind? We do not need to give a materialistic answer to
the question.(230) Almost every people has migrated at some period of its
existence. Urged on by their peculiar tastes and tendencies, they settled
in the places most in harmony with their character. A higher hand was over
them; one which, we should unreservedly trust, placed them in such
external circumstances as were most favorable to the development of all
their faculties.

But the influences of man on nature are no less notable than those of
nature upon man. The greater number of domestic animals and plants which
Europe possesses to-day, it has been obliged to introduce from other parts
of the globe.(231) In the interior of Gaul, the vine rarely ripened, at
the time of Christ.(232) On the other hand, Mesopotamia, formerly one of
the gardens of the world, is now covered with dried-up canals, filled a
little below the surface with heaps of brick and broken vases, the remains
and other vestiges of a once dense population. Its former rich alluvial
soil, now almost calcined, produces at present scarcely anything except a
few saline plants, mimosas etc.(233) The higher the civilization of a
people, the less does it depend on the nature of the country.



                             Section XXXVIII.


Of Labor.--Divisions Of Labor.


Man's capacity for most economic labor is so closely connected with the
exquisite articulation of the human hand, that Buffon could say without
exaggeration that reason and the hand made man man.(234) But it is true of
economic labor, as of all other labor, that it is more efficient in
proportion as mind predominates over matter.

The best division of economic labor is the following:(235)

A. Discoveries and inventions.(236)

B. Occupation of the spontaneous gifts of nature, as, for instance, of
wild plants, wild animals, and of minerals.(237) Where this is the only
kind of economic labor, man is necessarily dependent on nature in a high
degree.

C. The production of raw materials; that is, a direction given to nature
in order to the production of raw materials, by stock-raising,
agriculture, forest-culture etc., but not by mining.

D. The transformation (_Verarbeitung_) of raw material by means of
manufactories, factories, the trades etc.

E. The distribution of stores of goods among those who are to use them
directly, whether from people to people or from place to place
(wholesale), or among the individuals of the same place (retail).(238) To
this class also belong leasing, renting, loaning, etc.

F. Services, in the more limited sense of the term, which embraces
personal as well as incorporeal goods; as, for instance, the labors of the
doctor, teacher; virtuoso, of the statesman, judge, and of preachers,
whose office it is, by way of eminence, to produce and preserve the
immaterial wealth, known as the State and the Church.(239)

The order followed in the above classification is that in which the
different classes of labor are wont to be historically developed.



                              Section XXXIX.


Labor.--Taste For Labor.--Piece-Wages.


Man's taste for labor is conditioned especially by the extent to which,
and the security with which, he may hope to enjoy the fruit of his labor
himself. Hence it is that, as a rule, the slave (§ 71, ff.) and socager
work least willingly, the day laborer with less industry than the
piece-worker,(240) who is at the same time more satisfied with himself,
and gives most satisfaction to his master,(241) since he acquires more
both for himself and for his master. The superiority of piece-paid labor
is greater in proportion as the workman calculates his own advantage. It
is, therefore, smallest in the case of ingenuous uneducated workmen, and
in that of the really conscientious.(242) The fear of seeing one's
condition grow worse, through want of industry, exerts an influence
precisely similar to the hope of improving it. In both respects, free
competition (§ 97) must be considered one of the principal means of
furthering the taste for labor.(243)

Among the causes which have contributed to make England the first country
in the world, viewed from a politico-economical stand-point, English
writers on Political Economy have pointed out as one of the principal, the
prevalence there of piece-wages.(244) Payment by the piece should, of
course, be practiced, only in cases in which the work may be broken up
into a series of isolated tasks, and is completed by such a series. Hence,
it is not applicable where a great many different things are required of
the same workman; nor in relations in which continuity, as, for instance,
of the inclination or disposition of the workman is the chief thing.(245)
The further the division of labor is carried in our day, the greater the
part money plays in our social economy, and the more lasting relations are
dissolved, the more general becomes piece-work, which, with all its
material advantages, has, speaking morally, its dark side.
(_Atomism!_)(246) In a great many branches of manufactures it has been
relinquished because the excellence of his work suffered from the
workman's haste, and because he could not be properly controlled.(247) It
is rather the quantity than the quality of work which increases with
piece-work, and where the quality of the work is what is desired, this
system has not the same field. And where it obtains, as, for instance, in
the case of ordinary type-setters, resort is had to payment by the day for
compositors engaged on mathematical treatises, fac-similes, inscriptions
etc. On the side of the workman, it is generally only the idle and awkward
who oppose piece-work on principle. It is a subject of regret that the
best and most industrious workmen are carried away by it to an extent
detrimental to their health.(248) However, many of the deficiencies of the
piece-wage principle may be removed by agreements made with whole groups
of workmen; provided, always, that the groups are not too large to prevent
the mutual knowledge and surveillance of their members.(249) The quantity
of work is greatest, its quality best, and the material(250) employed used
most sparingly, when the workman works on his own account, or has a share
in the profits. This last is proper only in those branches of the business
the success of which depends on the quality of the work. To compel the
workman to share in the profits alone will not do, because he is generally
too poor to run any risk or to do long without his earnings. The system of
paying "commissions," therefore, is to be recommended all the more
strongly, since it is a combination of fixed wages with a share in the
profits. This system is very prevalent in North America, where a great
deal has to be confided to the workmen. It is practiced, also, in the
whale fisheries, and on the Greek ships in the Levant engaged in coasting,
where much more depends on the care of the sailors than on the ability of
the captain.(251) It presupposes good workmen, equal almost to their
master in education,(252) for instance, in the case of overseers of labor;
since every better inducement to the taste for labor which is not only
juster but more complicative, is not only a condition but also the effect
of higher culture. But if the economy of a people is ripe for share-wages,
and masters begin to introduce them in earnest in individual cases, the
work produced will be improved to such a degree that it can not be long
before all others will be necessitated to follow them.(253)

If,  however, workmen are to enjoy the fruit of their industry, it is
necessary, first of all, that public order should be secure. Even the most
industrious become discouraged where despotism or anarchy prevails. On the
other hand, even the greatest security is no sufficient incentive to a
nation of fatalists.(254)



                               Section XL.


Labor.--Labor-Power Of Individuals.


The average labor-power of individuals varies very much in different
nations.(255) The reason of this is, in part, doubtless a difference in
natural endowments. Thus, for instance, no people surpass the English and
Anglo-American in energy, none the German in intelligence in work or the
French in taste. Where we can assume that the same meaning is attached to
the expression, "military capacity," by the different recruiting bureaus,
important conclusions as to the physical labor-power of different
localities may be drawn from the ratio existing between the number of
those fit for military service and those who are legally liable to
military duty.(256)

But these conclusions are greatly modified by the state of civilization
and that of society. Where the laboring classes are despised and paid in a
manner unworthy of human beings, the badness of their work will be in
keeping with the estimation in which it is held. The reverse of this,
also, is usually true under different circumstances. (§ 173.) Thus, it has
been noticed in France, that native workmen, provided with as substantial
food as English workmen, are scarcely inferior to the the latter in the
technic value of their labor.(257) A Mecklenburg day laborer eats almost
twice as much as a Thuringian workman, but then he accomplishes almost
twice as much. Hence, employers gain in the long run by paying their
workmen well. As civilization advances, the same number of workmen become,
not only more industrious and more capable, but the same quantity and
quality of labor becomes, as a rule, cheaper.(258)

The moral culture of a people exerts the greatest influence here. In every
private undertaking, a great part of the expense attending it, and in
every state, a great part of the expense of its police system, and of its
system of administering justice, is occasioned only by the dishonesty of
men. If all this expense could be dispensed with, and full confidence
placed in individuals, it would be possible to devote much more time and
energy to positively useful labor.(259) In estimating the labor-power of
different nations or different periods of time, the division of population
according to age is also of importance. As a rule, the labor-power of
males is greatest from the age of twenty-five to the age of forty-five.
The more numerous, therefore, the class of the population between these
ages is, the more favorably, other things being equal, is it situated as
regards labor.(260)(261) But, as a rule, the relative number of full-grown
people is greatest in highly civilized nations. (§ 248.)(262)



                               Section XLI.


Labor.--Effect Of The Esteem In Which It Is Held.


As civilization advances, labor becomes more honorable. All barbarous
nations despise it as slavish. _Pigrum et iners videtur sudore adquirere
quod possis sanguine parare_: has been the motto of all medieval times. In
heathen Iceland, the owner of a piece of land might be deprived of it by
an adversary who could overpower him in single combat. This mode of
acquisition was considered more honorable than purchase. It was Thor's own
form of investiture. The ideas of the Romans on rightful acquisition may
be inferred from the word _mancipium_ (manu capere).(263) Pure
Christianity, on the other hand, preached the honorableness of labor from
the first (Thess. 4, 11; II. Thess. 3, 8 seq.; Eph. 4, 28). And so in the
time of the Reformation,(264) when Christendom was returning to its
primitive purity.

In keeping with this is the fact, that the most cultivated nations, and
the same may be said of individuals, value time most highly. "Time is
money." (_Benjamin Franklin._) An English proverb calls time the stuff of
which life is made.(265) While in negro nations, individuals do not even
know their own age; while in Russia, there are very few clocks to strike
the hours, even in the towers of churches, in England, a watch is
considered an indispensable article of apparel, even for very young people
and for some of the lower orders of society.(266) Railroads operate in
this respect as a kind of national clock. The introduction of machinery
and the more minute division of labor, make punctuality a necessity. While
South Americans and West Indians are frightfully careless in their every
movement, a carelessness which betrays itself even in their drawling
speech,(267) the life of a New Englander has been compared to the rush of
a locomotive. In the markets of Central Asia, nothing strikes the European
with so much surprise as the little value put upon time by the merchants
of India and Bucharia, who are fully satisfied when, after endless
waiting, they succeed in obtaining a somewhat higher price for their
wares.(268)



                              Section XLII.


Of Capital.--The Classes Of Goods Of Which A Nation's Capital Is Made Up.


Capital(269) we call every product laid by for purposes of further
production. (§ 220).(270)

Hence, the capital of a nation consists especially of the following
classes of goods:

A. _Soil-improvements_, for instance, drainage and irrigation works,
dikes, hedges etc., which are, indeed, sometimes so far part of the land
itself that it is difficult to distinguish them from it.(271) To this
class belong all permanent plantations.

B. _Buildings_, which embrace workshops and storehouses as well as
dwellings; also artificial roads of all kinds.

C. _Tools, machines and utensils_ of every description;(272) the latter
especially for personal service, and for the preservation and
transportation of other goods. A machine is distinguished from a tool in
that the moving power of the former is not communicated to it immediately
by the human body, which only directs it; while the latter serves as a
species of equipment, or as a better substitute for some member of man's
body.(273) To be of advantage, these three kinds of capital must save more
labor or fatigue than it has cost to produce them. Tools are, however,
older than machines. The aborigines of Australia used only a lance and a
club in hunting; the somewhat more civilized American Indians, the bow and
arrow; Europeans use firearms: in all of which a gradual progress is
observable. Of the blind forces which communicate motion to machines,
water was the first used, then the wind, and last of all, steam.(274)

D. _Useful and laboring animals_, in so far as they are raised, fed and
developed by human care.

E. _Materials for transformation_ (_Verwandlungsstoffe_): either the
principal material which constitutes the essential substance of a new
product, the yarn of the weaver for instance, the raw wool, silk or cotton
of the spinner; or the secondary material which, indeed, enters into the
work, but only for purposes of ornamentation, as gold-leaf, lac, colors
etc.

F. _Auxiliary substances_, which are consumed in production, but do not
constitute a visible part of the raw product,(275) as coal in a smithy,
powder in the chase or in mining, muriatic acid, in the preparation of
gelatin, chlorine in bleaching etc.

G. _Means of subsistence_ for the producers, which are advanced to them
until production is complete.

H. _Commercial stock_, which the merchant keeps always on hand to meet the
wants of his customers.

I. _Money_ as the principal tool in every trade that is made.

K. There is also what may be called _incorporeal capital_ (quasi-capital
according to _Schmitthenner_), which is as much the result of production
as any other capital, and is used in production, but which, for the most
part, is not exhausted by use. There are species of this kind of capital
which may be transferred, as for instance, the good will of a
well-established firm. Others are as inseparably connected with human
capacity for labor as soil-improvements with a piece of land; e.g., the
greater dexterity acquired by a workman through scientific study, or the
greater confidence he has acquired by long trial.(276) The state itself is
the most important incorporeal capital of every nation, since it is
clearly indispensable, at least indirectly, to economic production.(277)

The greater portion of the national capital is in a state of constant
transformation. It is being continually destroyed and reproduced. But from
the stand-point of private economy, as well as from that of the whole
people, we say that capital is preserved, increased or diminished
according as its value is preserved, increased or diminished.(278)
_Pretium succedit in locum roi et res in locum pretii._ "The greater part
in value of the wealth now existing in England, has been produced by human
hands within the last twelve months. A very small proportion indeed of
that large aggregate was in existence ten years ago; of the present
productive capital of the country, scarcely any part except farm-houses
and a few ships and machines; and even these would not, in most cases,
have survived so long, if fresh labor had not been employed within that
period in putting them into repair.... Capital is kept in existence from
age to age like population, not by preservation, but by reproduction."
(_J. S. Mill_.)



                              Section XLIII.


Capital.--Productive Capital.


Capital, according to the employment that can be given it, may be divided
into such as affects the production of material goods, and such as affects
personal goods or useful relations. The former, under the name of
productive capital, is, in recent politico-economical literature, usually
opposed to capital in use.(279) Evidently any one of the two kinds of
capital mentioned above, may be used for both purposes.(280) Indeed, the
two classes are, in many respects, coincident. Thus, a livery-stable
carriage or a circulating library is productive capital to its proprietor,
and capital in use(281) (_Gebrauchskapital_) to the nation in general;
although the circulating library from which an Arkwright obtains technic
information, or the livery-stable vehicle which carries a Borsig to his
counting-room, has certainly been used in the production of material
goods. Almost all capital in use may be converted into productive capital,
and hence, the former might be called quiescent capital, and the latter
working capital.(282) One of the principal differences between productive
capital and capital in use is, that the former, even when most judiciously
employed, does not so immediately replace itself, as the latter, by its
returns.(283) On the other hand, the real dividing line between capital in
use, and objects consumed which are not capital, is, and it is in complete
harmony with our definition of capital, that the latter are subject not
only to a more speedy destruction and one which is always contemplated,
while in the case of the former, its destruction is only the unintended
reverse-side of its use.

Among a highly civilized people, a great amount of capital in use, as
compared with the productive capital of the country, may be considered a
sure sign of great wealth. When this is the case, the people, without
losing the desire of further acquisition, think that they have enough to
richly enjoy the present. I need only call to mind the munificence
displayed by the middle classes in England, in their silver plate and
other domestic utensils. But the people of Russia, and Mexico also, can
make no mean display of silverware.(284) Here luxury is only a symptom of
the disinclination or inability of the inhabitants of the country to use
their capital in the production of wealth. How much richer would Spain be
to-day, if it had employed the idle capital spent in the ornamentation of
its churches in constructing roads and canals!(285) Most nations in a low
state of civilization suffer from the absence of legal guarantees. Each
one is compelled to turn his property into a shape in which it can be most
easily transferred from one place to another and hidden. This is the
principal reason why the Orientals possess, relatively speaking, so many
precious stones and so much of the precious metals. The same cause
accounts for the simplicity of their dwellings.(286) On the other hand,
productive capital is to be found in the greatest proportion among
civilized nations which are making very rapid strides towards wealth, the
people of the United States, for instance.



                              Section XLIV.


Capital.--Fixed Capital, And Circulating Capital.


Capital, according as it is employed, is divided into fixed capital and
circulating capital. Fixed capital may be used many times in production by
its owner; circulating capital only once. The value of the latter kind of
capital passes wholly into the value of the new product. In the case of
the former kind of capital, only the value of its use passes into the new
product. (_Hermann._) Hence, the farmer's beasts of burthen belong to his
fixed capital; their food, and his cattle intended for the slaughter, to
his circulating capital. In a manufactory of machines, a boiler intended
for sale is circulating capital; while a similar one, held in reserve for
the machines used in production, is fixed capital. Ricardo attributes a
somewhat different meaning to these two terms: he calls fixed capital that
which is slowly consumed, and circulating, that which disappears
rapidly.(287) Fixed capital is, indeed, produced and preserved by
circulating capital; but it is, for the most part, transformed again into
circulating capital.(288) Besides, it is only by means of the latter, that
the former can be productively employed.(289) The relative importance of
fixed and circulating capital to a country depends upon whether the
country is an advanced or only an advancing one. A people with very much
and very fixed capital are indeed very rich; but run the risk of offering
many vulnerable points to an aggressive enemy, and of thus turning the
easily jeopardized mammon into an idol. To make a passing sacrifice of the
country that the people and the state may be saved, as did the Scythians
against Darius, the Athenians against Xerxes, and the Russians against
Napoleon, becomes difficult, in proportion as the nation has become richer
in fixed capital.(290) But, as the destination of the latter is changed
with much greater difficulty than that of circulating capital, highly
cultivated nations would find it very hard to satisfy new wants, if they
could not always appropriate the results of additional savings to the
production of new fixed capital.



                               Section XLV.


Capital.--How It Originates.


Capital is mainly the result of saving which withdraws new products from
the immediate enjoyment-consumption of their possessor, and preserves
them, or at least their value, to serve as the basis of a lasting
use.(291) As capital represents the solidarity of the economic past,
present and future, it, as a rule, reaches back into the past and forward
into the future, through a period of time longer in proportion as its
amount and efficiency are greater.(292) Those producers, too, whose
products perish rapidly may, also, effect savings by exchanging their
products and capitalizing their counter-value. Thus, the actor, whose
playing leaves after it nothing but a memory, may use the wheat received
by him from a farmer who came to listen to him, in the employment of an
iron-worker, and invest the product permanently in a railroad. The
transformation may be effected by means of money, bonds etc., but it is
none the less real on that account. Order, foresight and self-restraint
are the intellectual conditions precedent of saving and capital. The
childish and hail-fellow-well-met disposition which cares only for the
present is inimical to it. True, the desire of saving can be developed
only where there are legal guarantees to ownership;(293) guarantees which
are both the conditions precedent and the effect of all economic
civilization.(294) The Indians, Esquimaux etc., had to be taught for the
first time by the missionaries and merchants--and it was with the greatest
difficulty it was done--to save their booty, and spare the natural sources
of their acquisition. Originally, they were, in the heat and excitement of
their wild hunting and fishing, wont to destroy on the spot what they
could not enjoy in the moment.(295) In the lowest stages of civilization,
the first saving of capital of any importance is effected frequently
through robbery or in the way of slavery.(296) In both cases, it is the
stronger who compel the weaker to consume less than they produce. See
_infra_, § 68. Where civilization is at its highest, the inclination to
save, as a rule, is very marked.(297) It begins to decline where a people
are themselves declining in civilization, and especially where legal
guarantees have lost their force.

But capital may be increased even without personal sacrifice; as for
instance, by mere occupation, as of certain goods, not hitherto recognized
as such. Thus, also, by the establishment of valuable relations, the
advantages of which either become the common good of all; or which,
because at the exclusive command of one individual, obtain value in
exchange. The progress of civilization itself may increase the value of
existing capital. Thus, for instance, a house, considered as capital, may
double in value if a frequented street be opened in its neighborhood. To
this category belong all improvements in the arts which enable existing
capital to achieve more than it could before. The invention of the compass
increased the value of the capital employed in the merchant marine to an
extent that cannot be calculated.(298) The increase of capital effected by
saving soon finds a limit unless such limit is widened by the progress of
civilization.(299)(300)




                               Chapter II.


Co-Operation Of The Factors.



                              Section XLVI.


The Productive Coöperation Of The Three Factors.


All economic production generally demands the coöperation of the three
factors: external nature, labor and capital. But with the political
economist, labor is the principal thing; and not merely because all
capital presupposes labor, nor because every combination of the three
factors is an act of labor; but, in general, because "the human mind's
idea of means and ends makes all goods goods for the first time."
(_Hufeland._)

Leaving the free forces of nature, surrounded by which we live and work,
out of consideration, and also the fact that all raw material is due to
nature, land is the indispensable foundation of all economy. But how
little can unassisted nature do to satisfy human wants! How much less to
produce goods possessed of value in exchange! A virgin forest, for
instance, sold in its natural state, has, indeed, value in exchange, but
only because it is taken into account that it can be cleared, and that
there are means of transportation already existing.(301) The greater part
of the forces of nature are latent to nomads and nations of hunters. When
labor develops, they are set free to assist it.(302) It is very seldom
that any thing can be produced without capital. Even the poorest gatherer
of wild berries needs a basket and must be clothed.(303) Were there no
capital, every individual would have to begin at the very beginning every
moment. Life would be possible only in a tropical climate. No man, since
the days of Adam, has been able to labor, except on the condition that a
considerable advance of capital had been made upon him. There is not a
nail in all England, says Senior, which cannot directly or indirectly
directly be traced back to savings made before the Norman conquest.(304)



                              Section XLVII.


Productive Co-Operation Of The Three Factors. The Three Great Periods Of A
Nation's Economy.


The relation of the three factors to one another is necessarily very
different in different branches of production. For instance, in the case
of cattle-raising on a prairie, labor does very little, land almost
everything. Hence an extensive, thinly populated country is best adapted
to this species of production. But where land is scarce, as in wealthy and
populous cities, human activity should be directed into those branches of
industry which need capital and labor, as manufactures and the trades. (§
198.)(305)

Looked at from this point of view, the history of the development of the
public economy of every people may be divided into three great periods. In
the earliest period, nature is the element that predominates everywhere.
The woods, waters and meadows afford food almost spontaneously to a scanty
population. This is the Saturnian or golden age of which the sagas tell.
Wealth, properly speaking, does not exist here, and those who do not
possess a piece of land run the risk of becoming completely dependent on,
or even the slave of a land owner. In the second period, that through
which all modern nations have passed since the later part of the middle
ages, the element, labor, acquires an ever increasing importance. Labor
favors the origin and development of cities as well as exclusive rights,
the rights of boroughs and guilds by means of which labor is, so to speak,
capitalized. A middle class is formed intermediate between the serfs and
the owners of the soil. In the third period, capital, if we may so speak,
gives tone to everything. The value of land is vastly increased by the
expenditure of capital on it, and in manufactures, machine labor
preponderates over the labor of the human hand.(306) The national wealth
undergoes a daily increase; and it is the "capitalism" which first gives
an independent existence to the economic activity of man; just in the same
way that law is, as it were, emancipated from land-ownership, from the
church and the family only in the constitutional state
(_Rechtsstaat_).(307) But, during this period, the middle class with its
moderate ease and solid culture may decrease in numbers, and colossal
wealth be confronted with the most abject misery.(308) Although these
three periods may be shown to exist in the history of all highly civilized
countries, the nations of antiquity, relatively speaking, never advanced
far beyond the second, even in their palmiest days. A great part of that
which is accomplished among us by means of capital and of machines, the
Greeks and Romans performed by the labor of slaves. Leaving Christianity
out of the question, nearly all the minor differences between the public
economy of the ancients and that of the moderns may be reduced to this
fundamental distinction.(309)(310)



                             Section XLVIII.


Critical History Of The Idea Of Productiveness.


In this chapter, the dogma-historical (_dogmengeschichtliche_) part is of
the utmost importance, because it treats of the connection between the
deepest fundamental notions and the principal branches of practical life.
It is clear that every political economist must construct his exposition
of productiveness on his prior notions of goods and value. We must,
therefore, draw a distinction between expositions which are logical but
altogether too narrow, and wholly erroneous ones.(311)

Thus, the Mercantile System admits every mode of applying the three
factors of production, but considers them really productive only in so far
as they increase the quantity of the precious metals possessed by the
nation, either through the agency of mining at home, or by means of
foreign trade. This view stands and falls with the altogether too limited
idea of national wealth before mentioned (§ 9), which this system
advocated.(312) The majority of the followers of the Mercantile System
ascribe more power to industry to attract gold and silver from foreign
parts, than to agriculture, and to the finer kinds of industry than to the
coarser; to active and direct trade, more than to passive and indirect
trade.



                              Section XLIX.


Critical History Of The Idea Of Productiveness.--The Doctrine Of The
Physiocrates.


The doctrine of the Physiocrates is to be explained in part by a very
natural reaction from the narrow-heartedness of the Mercantile System, and
at the same time, by a presentiment, misunderstood, of the true theory of
rent. (§ 150 ff.). Of the six classes of labor mentioned above (§ 38),
those only are called productive which increase the quantity of raw
material useful for human ends. All the other classes, it matters not how
useful, are called sterile, salaried, because they draw their income only
from the superabundance of land-owners and the workers of the soil.
Tradesmen, in the narrower sense of the term, produce only a change in the
form of the material, the higher value of which depends on the quantity of
other material consumed for the purposes of the tradesman's labor. If any
of this material is saved, the value of their products sinks, although to
the advantage of the economy of the whole nation. In any case, industry
could create no wealth, but only make existing wealth more lasting. It
might, so to speak, accumulate the value of the quantity of food consumed
during the building of a house in the house itself.(313)

But if tradesmen really earned, in the value of their products, only what
they had consumed during their labor, it would be difficult for them to
find employers to provide them with capital. Everyone will acknowledge,
that a Thorwaldsen and an ordinary stone-cutter, with the same block of
marble, the same implements, the same food, would necessarily, after the
same time, turn out exceedingly different values.(314) And, even in the
case that industry should add to the raw material only precisely the same
amount of value as had been consumed by the workmen, can it be said that
the work ceases to be productive simply because it is consumed by the
workmen themselves? If that were so, agriculture even, would, in most
countries with a low civilization, be unproductive.(315)

Commerce, according to the theory of the Physiocrates, only transfers
already existing wealth from one hand to another. What the merchants gain
by it is at the cost of the nation. Hence, it is desirable that this loss
should be as small as possible. Hence sterility!(316) But, the more
important branches of business, especially wholesale trade, are connected
with a transportation of goods (_Verri_), either from one place or from
one period of time, into another. Here the genuine merchant speculates
essentially on the difference of the values in use which are afterwards
greater than before.(317) The ice shipped yearly from Boston to tropical
lands met a much more urgent and wide-spread want there than it would if
it had remained at home. And thus the storage of grain in large quantities
after a bountiful harvest withdraws, indeed, an object of enjoyment from
the consumption of the people; but its sale, after a bad harvest,
undoubtedly increases their enjoyment in a much greater degree than it was
before diminished. Besides, the condition of both parties to the contract
is usually improved in all normal trade. (_Condillac._)(318) No one parts
with exchangeable goods unless they are of less use to him than the ones
he receives in return.(319) And so, the value in use of a nation's
resources is really increased by commerce. To the other attributes of
goods it adds one of the principal conditions of all use, accessibility
(_Kudler_), with which it either newly endows them, or which it increases
in degree. To this end, the merchant makes use of tools, just as the
manufacturer does. What spinning-wheels, looms and workshops are to the
latter, ships, warehouses, cranes etc., are to the former. If production
be not complete until the thing produced is made fit for its last end,
consumption, commerce may be looked upon as the last link in the chain of
productive labor. It, at the same time, constitutes a series of
intermediate links; as without it no division of labor is possible, and
without a division of labor, no higher economic productiveness.(320) How
commerce may increase the value in exchange of goods, and without in any
way injuring the purchaser, needs no further illustration.(321)



                                Section L.


The Same Subject Continued.


Even Adam Smith called services, in the narrower sense of the term (§ 3),
the grave and important ones of the statesman, clergyman and physician, as
well as the "frivolous" ones of the opera singer, ballet-dancer and
buffoon, unproductive. The labor of none of these can be fixed or
incorporated in any particular object.(322)(323) But how strange it is
that the labor of a violin-maker is called productive, while that of the
violin-player is called unproductive; although the product of the former
has no other object than to be played on by the latter? (_Garnier_.) Is it
not strange that the hog-raiser should be called productive, and the
educator of man unproductive (_List_); the apothecary, who prepares a
salve which alleviates for the moment, productive, the physician,
unproductive, spite of the fact that his prescription in relation to diet,
or his surgical operation, may radically cure the severest disease?

If the productiveness of an employment of the factors of production be
made to depend on whether it is attended by a material result, no one will
deny that the labor of the plowman, for instance, is productive; and no
one, of Adam Smith's school, at least, that that of the clerk, who orders
the raw material for the owner of the manufactory, is. They have
participated indirectly in the production. But, has not the servant of the
state, who protects the property of its citizens, or the physician, who
preserves the health of the producer, an equally mediate but indispensable
share in it? The field-guard who keeps the crows away, every one calls
productive; why, not, then, the soldier, who keeps away a far worse enemy
from the whole land? (_McCulloch._) But the entire division of business
into two branches, the one directly, and the other indirectly productive,
can be defended only as respects certain kinds of goods.
(_Schmitthenner._) The labor of the judge, for instance, is only
indirectly productive in the manufacture of shoes, inasmuch as he
guarantees the payment of the shoemaker's account. On the other hand, the
shoemaker contributes only very indirectly to the general security which
the law affords, by protecting the judge's foot.(324)

Nor can any effectual inferiority of service be claimed, simply because
the productive power of one branch of business is, measured by the
duration of its results, greater than another.(325) What is more
perishable than a loaf of bread bought for dinner? What more imperishable
than the _monumentum ære perennius_ of a Horace? The labor expended on
persons and on relations (_Verhältnissen_) is, both as to the extent and
duration of its results, much less capable of being estimated than any
other; but its capacity of accumulation and its power of propagation are
greater than any other. It is in the domain of the "immaterial," that man
is most "creative." (_Lueder._)(326) Finally, neither should the greater
indispensableness of the more material branches of business be too
generally asserted. Agriculture produces grain which is indispensable, and
tobacco which is not; industry, cloth, as well as lace; commerce draws
from the same part of the world rhubarb and edible bird's-nests; and so,
to _services_ belong the indispensable ones of the educator and judge, as
well as those of the rope-dancer and bear-leader, which can be dispensed
with.(327) Indeed, the dividing line between material and intellectual
production cannot, by any means, be closely drawn.(328)



                               Section LI.


The Same Subject Continued.


The greater number of recent writers(329) have, therefore, come to be of
the opinion that every useful business which ministers to the whole
people's requirement of external goods possesses economic
productiveness.(330) But it makes a great difference to science, whether a
view is considered true because no one has suggested a doubt of its
correctness, or because all doubts as to its truth have been triumphantly
removed.



                               Section LII.


Idea Of Productiveness.


It should never be lost sight of, that the public economy of a people
should be considered an organism, which, when its growth is healthy,
always develops more varied organs, but always in a due proportion, which
are not only carried by the body, but also in turn serve to carry it. The
aggregate of the wants of the entire public economy etc., is satisfied by
the aggregate activity of the people. Every individual who employs his
lands, labor or capital for the whole, receives his share of the aggregate
produce, whether he contributed or not to the creation of the kind of
produce in which he is paid. Thus, in a pin-manufactory, the workman who
is occupied solely in making the heads of pins is not paid in pins or
pin-heads, but in a part of the aggregate result of the manufacture, in
money. Every department of business, therefore, for the achievements of
which there is a rational demand, and which are remunerated in proportion
to their deserts, has labored productively. It is unproductive only when
no one will need what it has brought forth, or when no one will pay for
it; but, in this case, what is true of the writer without readers--that he
is unproductive--and of the singer without hearers, is equally true of the
peasant whose corn rots in his granary, because he can find no sale for
it.(331)



                              Section LIII.


The Same Subject Continued.


In this matter, again, there is an important difference to be observed
between private or individual economy and economy in its widest sense, in
the sense of a world-economy. The productiveness of labor is estimated in
the case of the former, according to the value in exchange of its result;
in the case of the latter, according to its value in use. There is a great
number of employments which are very remunerative to private individuals,
but which are entirely unproductive, and even injurious, so far as mankind
is concerned; for the reason that they take from others as much as, or
even more than they procure to those engaged in them. Here belong, besides
formal crimes against property, games of chance,(332) usurious
speculations (§ 113) and measures taken to entice customers away from
other competitors. Again, scientific experiments, means of communication
etc., may be entirely unproductive in the individual economy of the
undertaker, and yet be of more profit to mankind in general, than they
have cost the former.(333) In this respect the nation's economy holds a
middle place between individual economy and the world's economy.(334)
Strictly speaking, only those employments should be called productive
which increase the world's resources. Hence, the work of government should
be called so, only in so far as its expenses are covered by the taxes paid
willingly by the more reasonable portion of the citizens; and also only in
so far as its work is really necessary to the attainment of its end.(335)
The productiveness of an employment supposes, also, that it is not carried
on at the cost of other employments which it is more difficult to do
without. In a healthy nation we may, in this matter, rely, to a certain
extent, on the judgment of public opinion, which knows how to appreciate,
at their just value, professional gamblers, pettifoggers and the luxury of
soldiers. The greater, freer and more cultivated a nation is, the more
probable is it that the productiveness of private economy is also
national-economical productiveness, and that national-economical
productiveness is world-economical productiveness.(336)



                               Section LIV.


Importance Of A Due Proportion In The Different Branches Of
Productiveness.


Much always depends on the due proportion of the different branches of
productiveness to one another. Thus, Spain, for instance, has remained
poor under the most advantageous circumstances in the world,(337) because
it allowed a disproportionate preponderance of personal services. The
character of the Spanish people has always given them a leaning towards
aristocratic pride and economic idleness. Tradesmen, in that country,
sought, as a rule, to amass merely enough to enable them to live on the
interest of their capital; after which they, by way of preference, removed
it into some other province, where they might be considered as among the
nobility; or they withdrew into a monastery. Even in 1781, the Madrid
Academy thought it incumbent on it to propose a prize for the best essay
in support of the thesis: "The useful trades in no way detract from
personal honor."(338) During the century in which the country was in its
greatest glory, the whole people were bent on being to all Europe what
nobles, officers and officials are to a single nation. "Whoever wishes to
make his fortune," said Cervantes, "let him seek the church, the sea
(i.e., go as an adventurer to America) or the king's palace." Under Philip
III., there were in Spain nine hundred and eighty-eight nunneries, and
thirty-two thousand mendicant friars. The number of monasteries trebled
between 1574 and 1624, and the number of monks increased in a yet greater
ratio. A great many of its manufactories, much of its commerce, and not a
few of its most important farms were controlled by foreigners, especially
by Italians. There were, it seems, in 1610, one hundred and sixty thousand
foreign tradesmen living in Castile. In 1787, there were still 188,625
priests, monks, nuns, etc.; 280,092 servants; 480,589 nobles; 964,571 day
laborers; 987,187 peasants; 310,739 mechanics and manufacturers; 34,339
merchants.(339) As a counterpart to this, the United States had, in 1840,
about 77.5 per cent. of its population engaged in agriculture, 16.8 in
manufactures and mining, 4.2 in shipping and commerce, 1.3 in the learned
professions.(340)

We might be tempted, in view of this contrast, to return once more to the
unproductiveness of personal services. It is not, however, the direction
given to the forces of production, but the squandering of them, that is
injurious. When the Magyar, through mere vanity, drives a yoke of from
four to six horses where two are enough; or when, as in 1831, Irish
agriculture employed 1,131,715 workmen to produce a value of thirty-six
million pounds sterling, while that of Great Britain(341) produced one
hundred and fifty millions a year, and employed only 1,055,982 workmen,
these causes are as sure to impoverish the country, as the waste of the
Spaniards in supporting such an army of clergy and servants. Of course,
the temptation to waste wealth on parks is greater than to waste it in
vegetable gardens! The probability that a man will ruin himself by keeping
too many servants is greater than that he will do the same by employing
too many operatives.(342) And all the more, as there are many and
especially important services which regulate their own remuneration: thus,
as a rule, those of the statesman, those of the military in times of war,
and those of the priest in the age of superstition.(343)



                               Section LV.


The Degree Of Productiveness.


Concerning the degree of productiveness, it may be remarked that that
application of the factors of production is most productive, which, with
the least expenditure of means, satisfies the greatest want in the economy
of a people. Here, there is a continual change, corresponding precisely to
the change in wants and faculties. After a bad harvest, for instance, the
labor which procures grain from foreign countries or the supplies of
former years, is most productive; and, after an earthquake which has
destroyed a large city, the labor of the builder. Agriculture is, as a
rule, the more productive labor of undeveloped nations, and industry of
highly developed nations.(344)(345)




                               Chapter III.


The Organization Of Labor.



                               Section LVI.


Development Of The Division Of Labor.


The larger a tree grows to be, the more boughs and branches does it put
forth. The more perfect any species of animal is, the more does it stand
in need of a special organ for each special purpose. And thus the division
of labor has developed and kept pace with the development of human
society. While Crusoe was obliged to provide for all his wants by his own
labor, we find that in the wildest Indian family the male is employed in
war, the chase, in fishing, in the manufacture of arms and boats, and in
the transportation of the latter during long marches; the female, on the
other hand, in the preparation of food, in the hewing of wood, the curing
of skins, the sewing of clothes, in the building and preservation of the
wig-wam, the care of children, and the carriage of baggage when on the
march.(346) These occupations, at first entirely domestic, became, by
degrees, separate industries, which are constantly subject to further
subdivision.(347)



                              Section LVII.


Development Of The Division Of Labor.--Its Extent At Different Periods.


In the middle age of a people, the division of labor is not carried to any
great extent. The courtiers of King Frotho III. advised him to marry,
"since otherwise his majesty's ragged linen would never be mended." Saint
Dunstan, although he occupied a high position in politics and in the
Church, was an excellent blacksmith, bell-founder and designer of ladies'
robes. Chriemhild in the Nibelungenlied was an industrious and skillful
milliner. In the corresponding period of Grecian and Roman history, we
find Penelope and Lucretia at the loom, Nausicaa, a laundress, the
daughter of the king of the Lestrigons, fetching water from the spring,
Odysseus, a carpenter, a queen of Macedonia as a cook, and finally the
distaff of Tanaquil.(348) In the highlands of Scotland, in 1797, there
were a great many peasants all of whose clothing was home-made, with the
exception of their caps; nothing coming from abroad except the tailor, his
needles and iron tools generally. But the peasant himself was the weaver,
fuller, dyer, tanner, shoemaker etc. of his own family:(349) every man
jack of all trades.(350)

In present England, on the other hand, the manufacture of watches is
divided into one hundred and two branches which have to be specially
learned; only the so-called "watch-finisher" carries on other branches
besides. In Wolverhampton, it may happen that a man, employed in the
manufacture of keys, may not be able to make a whole key after an
apprenticeship of ten years, for the reason that during all that time he
may have been engaged only in filing.(351) In English agriculture there
are, according to German notions, very few complete wholes. A well-marked
distinction exists there between the cultivators of corn and breeders of
cattle; and the latter are again divided into breeders of young cattle,
into fatteners of cattle etc. Its industries are, in large part, separated
into provinces. Thus, linen manufactures are confined almost exclusively
to Leeds and Dundee, woolen manufactures, to Leeds,(352) cotton
manufactures, to Manchester, and Glasgow, pottery to Stafford, coarse iron
to South Wales, hardwares to Birmingham, cutlery to Sheffield. And so in
the different quarters of the city. Thus, in large towns, the banks,
stores, offices etc., are found in one portion, with scarcely any
intervening dwelling houses.

On the division of labor depends all differences of estate and class, and
all human culture. It cannot be claimed that a division of labor does not
exist among animals;(353) but those animals among which something
analogous to a division of labor among men exists, are raised far above
all others by their human-like economy and the relative importance of
their achievements.(354)



                              Section LVIII.


Advantages Of The Division Of Labor.


The advantages of all suitable division of labor, consequent upon the
natural differences of human faculties and dispositions, are the
following:

A. _The greater skill of the workman._ Even physically, many capacities
are, by an indefinite number of repetitions of the same operation,
enhanced to an extraordinary degree; which, however, renders the
performance of other operations more difficult. Thus, the man who has
developed his muscles and hardened his hands working in a smithy, renders
himself incapable of becoming a violin-player or an operating
oculist.(355) Here belongs especially the possibility of turning every
kind of labor-power to greatest account. Even children(356) and old men
may be made, in this way, to play a part in the production of goods. It
becomes practicable, too, to relieve men endowed with superior faculties
from common labor, and allow them to devote themselves exclusively to the
development of the peculiar powers with which nature has gifted them.(357)

B. _A great saving of time and trouble._ The simpler the operation
performed by a single workman, the more easily is it learned; the smaller
is the price paid or apprenticeship, which depends on this, at least, that
beginners perform poorer work and are paid more poorly. "The shortest way
to the end is most easily found when the end itself is near, and can be
kept continually in view." (_J. B. Say_.) Where the same workman combines
different operations, a great deal of time is lost in changing tools etc.
Besides, it always takes some time for a workman to get rightly under way
of his work. The person who changes thus frequently becomes more easily
indolent. Lastly, there is a great number of operations which demand the
same aggregate amount of effort, no matter what the number of objects on
which they are performed. It is thus, for instance, with shepherds,
mail-carriers etc.(358) The post carries a thousand letters with almost as
much ease as one; and the entire life of a wholesale dealer would scarcely
suffice to carry all the letters which he mails in a single day, to their
place of destination. During the middle ages, every man was obliged to
watch over his own personal safety and the maintenance of his own rights;
while in 1850, in Great Britain, twenty-one million people are protected
in their persons and property, in an infinitely more effectual manner, and
at less cost, by fifteen thousand soldiers, and by a much smaller number
of policemen, whose place it is to preserve public order. (_Senior_.)
Something similar takes place among merchants, and it may be admitted as
correct in principle, that every new intermediary, freely recognized by
both sides in commerce,(359) makes labor better or less expensive.

C. As the land of a country is, in a sense, the natural extension of the
national body, _the international division of labor_ affords an indirect
means, but frequently an indispensable one, of procuring the products of
foreign countries and climates.(360) If the English people wished to
obtain themselves, and without having recourse to any intermediary, the
quantity of tea which they annually consume, it is possible that its whole
agricultural population would not suffice to procure it; while, at
present, it is obtained by the labor of forty-five thousand industrial
workmen. (_Senior_.) Moreover, the division of labor increases not only
the aptitude of the workman but also his incentive to productive labor,
since it guarantees to every one the certainty of being able, by means of
exchange, to enjoy the productions of every other person.(361)



                               Section LIX.


Conditions Of The Division Of Labor.


It is by its division, that labor, considered as a factor of production,
is raised to the highest degree of efficiency. Its results in any given
industry are, therefore, more important in proportion as the element labor
predominates in it. Hence, these results are much smaller, in agriculture,
for instance, than in the trades, or in personal services.(362) The most
expert sower or harvester cannot be employed the whole year through in
sowing or harvesting. Some kind of rotation of crops, some kind of
combination of tillage and stock-raising is necessary to every
agriculturist. On this depends the importance of the technic secondary
industries of agriculture, which are, in principle, opposed to the
division of labor. Hence, too, almost any person engaged in a trade, no
matter of what kind, supposes a greater number of customers than a tiller
of the land of the same rank.

The more labor is divided, the greater is the amount of capital necessary
to it.(363) It may be even said, that all preparatory labor becomes
capital in its relation to subsequent labor. If ten isolated workmen can
produce ten dozen articles of any kind, daily, and, after the introduction
of a more efficient division of labor, fifty dozen, the employer must
provide them, in the latter case, not only with five times as much
capital, but probably with fifty times as much, as then, five hundred
dozen are making continually.



                               Section LX.


Influence Of The Extent Of The Market On The Division Of Labor.


But it is the extent of the market especially which determines the limits
of the division of labor; for there is a direct and necessary relation
between the division of labor and the exchange of its surplus. Hence, the
division of labor may be carried farthest in the case of those products
which are most easily transported from place to place, and which, at the
same time, possess the utility that is most widely recognized. The
smallness of the market may depend upon the scantiness of the population,
or upon its scattered condition;(364) upon their smaller ability to pay,
or upon the bad means of communication at their disposal.(365) Hence it
is, that in villages, small cities, and still more on isolated farms, many
branches of business are carried on by one person, which are divided among
many in larger cities; and this is especially true in the case of
businesses which have a chiefly local demand.(366) While, in small places,
the barber is also frequently the physician, in larger ones there are
dentists, oculists, accoucheurs, surgeons etc.(367); and while, in the
former, the tavern keeper is both dry goods merchant and grocer, there
are, in the latter, tea merchants, cigar-dealers, dealers in mourning
goods (in London childbed-linen warehouses) etc., and hotels for all the
different classes of travelers. There can be a distinct class of porters,
hack-men etc., only where commerce is very active.(368) And even in cities
like Paris, where the costly industries that minister to luxury, that of
the jeweler, for instance, admit of only a limited division of labor, this
effect depends on the smallness of the market; a market, indeed, which
geographically may extend over the whole earth, but which, in an economic
sense, must always remain small, on account of the small number of
customers who have the ability to pay for their products. The real wonders
produced by the division of labor and the employment of machinery we must
look for in the manufacture of the cheapest and commonest
commodities.(369)



                               Section LXI.


The Division Of Labor--Means Of Increasing It.


Whoever, therefore, would increase the division of labor among the people,
must, first of all, extend their market; and this is done most efficiently
by improving the means of communication. Even in our day, it is over the
water-highroads that the heaviest articles are carried with the least
expenditure of force;(370) but where civilization is not advanced, these
highroads possess still greater advantages, because of their safety,
convenience and priority. And here is the explanation of the intimate
connection of the beginnings of all civilizations with the existence, near
the scene of such beginnings, of good natural water-roads. "Even the
wildest inhabitant of the sea coast very soon obtains the idea of
distance, which is altogether wanting to the inhabitant of the primeval
forest. No sooner does he catch sight of the far-off island than his
yearning after the distant assumes a well-defined character. Bits of wood
floating past him suggest to his mind the best material to buoy himself up
upon the water, and a fish the best form for his craft." (_Klemm._) Hence
the Mediterranean sea, especially the eastern portion, with the various
peoples and products of its coasts, with its numerous islands, peninsulas
and bays, its easy navigation, but little influenced by the tides or by
ocean currents, was the principal seat of ancient civilization.(371) The
literal meaning of Attica is coast-land. (_Strabo._) The colonization of a
new country is wont, where possible, to begin on the coast, especially on
islands near the coast; and to follow the course of rivers into the
interior. Even whole continents occupy, for the most part, in the history
of the world, the position assigned them by their coast-development.(372)
While it is hard to determine whether, in the case of the European
continent, its limbs predominate or its trunk, Africa may be said to be a
trunk without members. Its islands, most of them insignificant in
themselves, are almost entirely cut off from it by ocean currents. This
explains why Madagascar had not, by any means, the influence on African
civilization which Crete, Sicily and Britain have had on the civilization
of Europe. Asia occupies, in this respect, about a middle position between
Europe and Africa. The trunk of that continent bears to its members about
the proportion of 670,000 to 150,000 square miles. And what is worst of
all, the middle of the whole is an almost insurmountable wall between
north, south, east and west Asia. Hence the tenacious peculiarity and
isolated development of the Chinese, Malayan, Indian and Arabic
civilizations; while the three peninsulas of southern Europe, for
instance, have affected one another so largely, and in so many different
ways.(373) The northern hemisphere compared with the southern, presents a
contrast similar to that between Europe and Africa, or of the rich
coast-groups of the Atlantic compared with the poor ones of the
Pacific.(374) But it is most especially, large, well-watered plains that
are best adapted to the construction of roads, and thus to facilitate the
division of labor. And while we find, in many countries, that the
mountainous regions reached a certain stage of development earlier than
any others, because they were more easily protected by military force, we
find, too, that even here, plains, have, for the most part, had the
largest share of power and of civilization (northern Italy, northern
France, the plains of Switzerland and north Germany). See § 36.(375) We
must not, however, fail to consider the reverse side of the picture of the
great highways of the world. The same reasons that raise them to the
dignity of lines of commerce, make them lines of war; and even the
contagion of great plagues and of the ruling vices follows, as a rule, the
avenues of trade.



                              Section LXII.


The Reverse, Or Dark Side Of The Division Of Labor.


There are hardships often attending the highly developed division of
labor, the dark and bright sides of which are most strikingly observable
only in large cities. However, when it is charged with adding to the
natural inequality of men, the accusation can be met only by the answer,
that, without the division of labor, we should be all equally poor and
equally coarse; for each one would be absorbed by the necessity of
providing for his lower wants, and no one would be in a way to develop his
higher faculties. Even the poorest man has more enjoyment in consequence
of the division of labor, than he could have living in a state of
isolation from his fellow men. The most wretched among us, the invalid
without property of any kind, the father of a family with more children
than he can support, would simply starve in the primeval forest.

Those socialists who never tire of preaching "association," overlook for
the most part, the great, free association which our needs, wants or
tastes are ever changing, and which is given us, as of course, by the
division of labor.(376) Yet the skill produced by the division of labor is
unavoidably connected with a corresponding one-sidedness. The Russians,
for instance, are exceedingly apt, but they rarely distinguish themselves
in any thing.(377) Love of his avocation, or pride in it, is a thing
unknown to the Russian workman. He shirks all continuous labor.(378)
Experience has shown that the Neapolitans and Italians, in general,
exhibit great skill when they work alone; but that when a great many of
them work together, they become rapidly confused. The English, on the
other hand, are slow to learn anything new, or to overcome unlooked for
difficulties; but they have no equals as workmen in organized
industries.(379) The difficulty experienced in seeking a new calling,
where a high division of labor obtains, arises as much from the fact that
each person here has received a more one-sided training, as from the
necessity he is under of competing from the first with only consummate
workers. Rousseau's school has laid too much stress on the tendency of
higher civilization to diminish individual independence. _Quand on sait
creuser un canot, battre l'ennemi, construire une cabane, vivre de peu,
faire cent lieues dans les forêts sans autre guide que le vent et le
soleil, sans autre provision qu'un arc et des flêches; c'est __ alors
qu'on est un homme!_(380) We might reply that to build a steamship or a
palace, and to travel around the world are far better. (_Dunoyer._) Even
physically, civilized man is superior to the savage, as might be inferred
from the greater average duration of life of the former. Of course,
extremes should not be compared, nor should we contrast the frame of a
weaver or student with that of a savage chief.(381)

In a similar way, the one-sidedness of the international division of labor
may be pregnant with great danger to national independence.



                              Section LXIII.


Dark Side Of The Division Of Labor.--Its Gain And Loss.


Where, indeed, the one-sidedness produced by the division of labor goes so
far as to cause the degeneration(382) of the workman's personality, the
human loss of the nation is greater than the material gain purchased by
it. Thus the occupation of polishing metals or gilding, when continued for
a long time without interruption, invariably ruins the health. What must
be the aspect of the soul of a workman who, for forty years has done
nothing but watch the moment when silver has reached the degree of fusion
which precedes vaporization! who is blind to all else, but receives a good
fat salary for his services.(383) Schleiermacher rightly declared all
human action which is purely mechanical, through which man becomes a
living tool (slave!) immoral. When the division of labor has reached this
point, machines should take the place of men. The morality of a profession
may be measured by the degree in which it corresponds with the universal
calling of the race.(384) It is not, therefore, a piece of inconsistency
but rather a deeply felt want, when, where civilization is at its highest,
so many demands are made that the division of labor should take a
retrograde path. The practice of gymnastic exercises by the sedentary
classes, universal military duty, the participation of citizens in
municipal government and in political affairs, of laymen in the government
of the church, of the wealthy in the administration of charity; all these
things are, from a materialistic stand-point, considered a great
squandering of time. It may be, that, if the division of labor were more
rigidly carried out, we might, by its means, obtain more perfect results
with less economic expense. But the whole man is of more importance than
the sum of his achievements and enjoyments. (Luke, 9:25.) Wo to the nation
where only jurists have a developed sense of the right, where political
judgment and cultivated patriotism are the portion of only officials and
placemen, where only the standing army has warlike courage, and the clergy
only conscious religiousness; where parents leave all care for education
to the teachers of the various branches of learning, and where physical
vigor is to be found only among the proletarians. Hence there is nothing
more ruinous than premature one-sided education in a single trade or
profession--a thing which often happens from poverty before the foundations
of the general education becoming a human being have been laid. The higher
a man's position, the more should he, so to speak, be a representative of
the whole human race. Who, for instance, would wish to see a ruler brought
up as men are to a special branch of science or to a special
profession?(385)(386) The best corrective for the one-sidedness produced
by a high division of labor consists in the extension and many-sided
employment of leisure time, both of which are made more easy by the same
high civilization which always accompanies the division of labor.(387)



                              Section LXIV.


The Co-Operation Of Labor.


The coöperation or combination(388) of labor must, however, always
correspond to the division of labor. Both are but different sides of the
one idea of social labor; the separation of different kinds of labor, in
so far as they would disturb one another, and the union or combination of
them so far as they help one another.(389) The vintner or grower of flax
would necessarily die of hunger if he could not certainly count on the
grower of corn. The workman in a pin-factory, who prepares only the heads
of pins, must be sure of his colleagues who sharpen the points, if his
labor would not be entirely in vain. The labor of the merchant is not even
thinkable without that of the different producers between whom he
mediates. Where the production of a certain article depends on the
services of six different kinds of labor, one of which, however, demands
thrice the time, and another twice the time of the rest, it is clear,
that, in order that the business may be properly carried on, so many
workmen should be employed that their number divided by 9 should leave no
remainder. (_Rau._) The union or combination of different kinds of labor
is most perfect when the workmen live nearest together; when, therefore,
they are not separated by great difficulties of transportation; or in
different countries, in which case, a war might tear all to pieces.



                               Section LXV.


The Principle Of Stability, Or Of The Continuity Of Work.


Coöperation in time is of equal importance: the principle of the
stability, or of the continuity of labor. When a workman dies, it is
necessary to be able to calculate on a substitute. It is well known that
it is much harder to begin a business, than it is, afterwards, to improve
and enlarge it; and this, the more complicated it is. A new enterprise
will take root easily, only where there are several similar ones already
in existence; a new manufacturing establishment, for instance, where by
the existence of other such establishments, the requisite habits of the
workmen, of capitalists and of the public in general, have been previously
developed. The skill of workmen is propagated especially by observation
and the personal emulation of the young; whence it is, that the
introduction of new industries is best made by the immigration of skilled
workmen.(390) Hence the baleful influence of such interruptions, as for
instance, the repeal of the edict of Nantes. Hence too, it is, that
despotism and the reign of the populace are so unfavorable to the economy
of a country, where there can be no guarantee of a consistent observance
and development of the laws. To the best applications of the principle of
the continuity of labor belong the church-building of the middle ages, the
national canals, the street and fortification systems of modern times; all
of which have been created only by the coöperation of several generations
to the same end.(391) The most striking means by which such a coöperation
has been advanced in modern times is public credit, "a draft on
posterity;" yet, all saving is, in principle, the same. The most powerful
element in the coöperation in time of labor is the economy in common of
the family, although it differs in degree, according to the different
kinds of family inheritance. Where, as among the English middle classes,
it is customary to secure the business property of the family to one child
by will, and to entrust the conduct of the business, during the life of
the father, to the devisee, to provide for the other children by
insurance, by savings etc., made from the surplus of the business, there
may be old firms which remain always new, however; because they combine
the experience of age with the energy of youth, and are never broken up by
a division of the inheritance. But the compulsory equality of heirs, which
actually obtains in France, compels almost every new generation to begin
with a new firm. (See § 85 seq.)(392)



                              Section LXVI.


Advantage Of Large Enterprises.


On the results of the division and coöperation of labor rests the superior
advantage of all great undertakings, and they are, therefore, smaller in
agriculture than in industry. "It is harder to acquire the first thousand
than the second million." Abstraction made of the conditions of capital
and of the market, the limit up to which the growing magnitude of an
enterprise becomes more advantageous, lies in the increasing difficulty of
superintendence. Numberless commercial improvements, such as the
post-office, railroads, telegraphs, exchange, banks etc., have operated
powerfully to extend these limits. It is frequently possible, even in
small enterprises, to secure the advantages of large enterprises, by
association among those concerned. They must, of course, possess the
necessary capital. If they have not got it, as property, they must borrow
it. It is, of course, peculiarly difficult here to preserve the necessary
unity, without which the coöperation of labor becomes the confusion of
labor. The more moral and intelligent the participants are and the simpler
the business, the more extensive may it become, and the more probable will
be its success. (§ 90.)(393)(394)(395)




                               Chapter IV.


Freedom And Slavery.



                              Section LXVII.


The Origin Of Slavery.


An institution like that of personal bondage, which, it can be shown, has
existed, among all nations of which history gives us information, at one
time or another, must have very general causes. Among these may be
mentioned especially subjection through war. It is not possible to
calculate how much the principle, that it was proper to reduce the man to
slavery whom it was considered right to kill, contributed to make war less
bloody in an uncivilized age.(396) A nation of hunters is almost compelled
to grant no quarter; the conqueror would be obliged either to feed his
prisoner or to put arms in his hands. It is certainly a great humanitarian
advance, when this state of things is superseded by slavery among nomadic
nations.(397)

In times of peace, economic dependence is the result of poverty, excessive
debt etc.(398) Where there is no division of labor, the individual has no
means of supplying his wants, except by cultivating a spot of ground. But,
how can the poor wretch who has neither capital(399) nor land exchange
anything of value for either? Such an advance, where there is no security
in law, can be made only on the credit of a very important pledge. But the
man who is destitute of all property can offer nothing but the productive
power of himself or of his family.(400) And so it is with the small landed
proprietor who has lost all his capital;(401) for, considering the
superabundance of land, the part which he possesses has value in exchange
only to the extent that it is joined with the certainty of being
cultivated; and here is the origin of the _glebæ adscriptio_. The
hereditary transmission of the relation to the children seems to be
equally useful to them; or who, were this not the case, would think of
providing them with food? It also frequently happens that poor parents
prefer to sell their children to seeing them starve.(402) Hence the
strange fact that most nations have the most rigid system of slavery
precisely at the time that the soil produces food most readily. We need
only cite the instance of the South Sea Islands, at the time of their
discovery. In many negro countries, where the people have not yet learned
to use animals for transportation, the lowest classes, although they enjoy
a nominal liberty, are used as beasts of burden.(403)



                             Section LXVIII.


The Same Subject Continued.


In all very low stages of civilization, the greatest absence of the
feeling of wants, and the greatest indolence, are wont to prevail, and in
the highest degree. As soon as their merest necessities are provided for,
men begin to look upon labor as a disgraceful occupation, and indolence as
the highest kind of enjoyment. (§ 41, 213 ff.) Sustained and voluntary
efforts, in any number, then become possible only by the creation of new
wants; but these new wants suppose a higher civilization. Escape from this
sorry circle is then effected in the most humane manner, through the
agency of foreign teachers; inasmuch as the representatives of a more
highly cultivated people (missionaries, merchants etc.), by their own
example, make the nation acquainted with more wants, and at the same time
help toward their satisfaction.(404) But, in the case of nations whose
civilization is completely isolated, or having intercourse only with
others equally low, progress is the creature of force exclusively. The
barbarous isolation of families ceases when the strongest and most
powerful force the weaker into their service. It is now that _the division
of labor really begins_: the victor devotes himself entirely to work of a
higher order, to statesmanship, war, worship etc.; the very doing of which
is generally a pleasure in itself. The vanquished perform the lower. The
one-half of the people are forced to labor for something beyond their own
brute wants. And it is, here as elsewhere, the first step that costs.(405)
(§ 45.)



                              Section LXIX.


Origin Of Slavery.--Want Of Freedom.


It is not to be supposed that slavery, at this stage, is so oppressive
even to those who have been deprived of their freedom. The feeling of
moral degradation which slavery, abstraction even made of its abuses,
awakens in us, is unknown in a very uncivilized age.(406) The child
willingly obeys the orders of strangers, and is hired out to service by
his parents etc. The want or craving for liberty keeps pace with the
intellectual growth of a people. The systematic over-working of servants
or slaves, in the interest of their masters, is scarcely thinkable in an
uncultured age, when, in the absence of commercial intercourse, every
family consumes what it produces.(407) The only thing which the slave has
to fear is an occasional outburst of tyranny on the part of the master, a
thing which is far from unfrequent in all the relations of low
civilizations. Fear restrains masters to a certain extent; for, in those
early days, how few were the institutions of state which could protect
them against the vengeance of their slaves!(408)(409)



                               Section LXX.


Emancipation.


As states grow greater and men's manners gentler, the ranks of slavery are
less and less liable to be recruited through the agency of war.(410) It
then becomes necessary to have recourse to the family to keep up their
number, which makes their condition much more endurable, and which
supposes that it has been made more endurable in other respects
beforehand. Modern states, are, as a rule, larger than the ancient were.
The Germans had, long before the time of Charlemagne, treated prisoners of
war of German origin more mildly than those of Gallic or Slavic
origin.(411) The condition of the latter even improved from the time that
nations began to think of making permanent conquests. Since the Slavic
wars of the tenth century, certainly since the Lithuanian contests, it
seems that prisoners of war were not reduced to slavery.(412) Chivalry,
and allowing prisoners to go free, on their word of honor, contributed
largely to this result.

The more productive agriculture is, the more numerous the wants of land
owners, the more extensive the division of labor and commercial
intercourse become, the easier it is for a large class of the community to
obtain support for themselves and families without cultivating land of
their own. (Wages.) When exchanges through the medium of money become
customary, the chief argument for slavery disappears; and the strong, rich
and able man can, without having recourse to force, command the labor of
other men. Every further advance in economic culture must necessarily help
forward in this direction. Thus, without the plow, for instance, we should
all be really only so many _glebæ adscripti_. It is due especially to the
ever increasing perfection of tools, machines and operations, that the
slave of antiquity was transformed into the serf of the middle ages, and
afterwards into the day laborer of modern times.(413) It is more
particularly to be remarked, that machines, since 1750, "first made the
constitutional liberty of many, instead of the feudal freedom of a few,
possible." (_Schäffle._)



                              Section LXXI.


Disadvantages Of Slavery.


Slavery promotes the division of labor only in the very beginning. The
more dependent the slave is, the worse he works. Whatever he spoils or
allows to go to waste injures only his master. Hence it is that
slave-husbandry is only one degree removed from what the Germans call
_Raubbau_, and which means, as nearly as we can translate it, the most
thoughtless and wasteful management possible.(414) Whatever he consumes is
simply so much gain to himself. Industry and skill are injurious to him,
because, if remarkable for these qualities, his master exacts more work
from him and is more adverse to setting him at liberty. Instead of the
numberless incentives of the free workman: care for the future, for his
family, honor and comfort, the slave is generally moved by one--the fear of
ill-treatment, and to this he gradually becomes insensible.(415) The
division of labor demanded by manufactures, and which is to be found for
the most part only where each person is at liberty to choose his own
avocation, is scarcely supposable where slavery, in the strict sense of
the word, prevails. The same is true of the spirit of invention and
improvement.(416) And even where the milder _glebæ __ adscriptio_ obtains,
the division of labor is much hindered. Hence, competent judges all agree
on the badness of slave labor;(417) which, as for instance in the United
States, was used only where the slaves were crowded together in large
numbers and could therefore be easily superintended. And not only are the
slaves themselves indolent, but their masters as well; more particularly
in slave countries where all labor is considered disgraceful. What must be
the national husbandry of a people, one half of whom refuse to do anything
that is right and proper, through malice, and the other half through
pride! As soon as, on account of increased population and consequent
increased consumption, this enormous waste of force can be endured no
longer, free workmen become more profitable, not only to themselves and to
the whole community, but to the greater number of the individuals who
compose it.(418) On the Bernstoff estates the quantity of rye harvested
before and after emancipation was as 3:8-{~VULGAR FRACTION ONE THIRD~}; of barley-corn as 4:9-{~VULGAR FRACTION ONE THIRD~}; of
oat-grain as 2-{~VULGAR FRACTION TWO THIRDS~}:8.(419)

The owners of serfs, especially, are apt to be very wasteful of their
labor, because they imagine that they obtain it gratis. Tucker has made a
curious calculation tending to show that when civilization reaches a
certain point, the master's self-interest leads to emancipation. In
Russia, where there are seventy-five persons to the English square mile,
it seemed to him that serfdom was still a good economic speculation. In
western Europe, where there were one hundred and ten persons to the square
mile, freedom, in all relations of master and servant, he considered more
advantageous to all parties. Emancipation began in England in the
fourteenth century, when that country had a population of forty to the
square mile, and was completed in the seventeenth, when the population was
ninety-two to the square mile.(420) Tucker concludes, that the turning
point comes, when the population is relatively to the number of square
miles as 66:1.(421) Such a calculation cannot, of course, be universally
true. The free workman can usually command a much larger portion of the
sum total of economic profits than can the slave or serf, who must be
satisfied with the minimum necessary to support life.(422) Hence, free
labor is more profitable to masters only when production in general is so
much enhanced thereby that a greater quantity of goods falls to their
share also. But this will always be the case where workmen are capable of
development.(423)



                              Section LXXII.


Effect Of An Advance In Civilization On Slavery.


At the same time, the same degree of servitude becomes more and more
oppressive to the bondman as civilization advances. The greater his
intellectual progress, the more does he feel the want of liberty, and the
more keenly he experiences the degradation of his condition. The
development of luxury digs a gulf between master and servant which grows
wider every day. (§ 227 ff.) As commerce extends, it becomes more
profitable for the master to exact excessive work from his slave. In the
West Indies, it was a problem which every slaveholder solved for himself,
whether, by immoderately increased production, which cost the lives of
many slaves, the gain in sugar was greater than the loss occasioned by the
consequent death of the negroes.(424) When, with the advance of
civilization, the state guarantees to all more certain protection of their
rights than they enjoyed in a less advanced stage of social improvement,
the last check on masters, the fear of the vengeance of their slaves, is
removed.(425) Demoralization naturally increases in the same proportion;
and that of the master as well as that of his servants.(426)



                             Section LXXIII.


The Same Subject Continued.


This explains why it is that, in all countries, the power of the state, in
a period of transition towards a higher civilization, has endeavored to
render slavery milder. Great credit is due the Church in this regard. It
soon extinguished slavery entirely in Scandinavia,(427) and in portions of
Europe it abolished at least the sale of prisoners to foreign
countries.(428) The _Concilium Agatheuse_, in the year 506, decreed that
serfs should not be killed by their masters at pleasure,(429) but that
they should be brought before a tribunal of justice. (The manorial
tribunals of more recent times.) Moreover, the numberless holidays of the
church operated greatly in favor of the bondmen. Pope Alexander III.
recommended their gradual emancipation.(430) One of the principal steps in
the way of progress was made when they could no longer be sold singly, but
only with the village or on the estate to which they belonged.(431) The
feudal aristocracy improved the condition of the bondmen by reducing a
great number of freemen to their level.(432) This could not be effected
without a real amelioration of slavery; and, later, when the feudal
aristocracy declined, the older serfs were, with those who had been
formerly free, raised from their abject condition. The sense of chivalry
would not permit a lord to be served by a bondman. The old adage "the serf
lives to serve and serves to live," by degrees, lost its force. Serfs were
required to perform certain tasks on the lands of their master and to pay
him a certain quantity of the produce of their own. Heriots
(_mortuarium_), which became usual from the 8th century (_J. Grimm_), may
be considered evidence that even bondmen were permitted to acquire and
hold property in their own right. Thus was one of the chief disadvantages
of slavery, in an economic sense, removed.(433) It may be affirmed, as
characteristic of the aristocracy of feudal times, that they treated
those, who like the serfs were entirely at their mercy, with much more
consideration than those who were free, and, although dependent on them,
had certain rights guaranteed by contract. The absolute monarchy found in
nearly all nations, at the opening of modern times, was forced by its
struggle with the mediæval aristocracy to favor the emancipation of the
serfs and of the lower classes. Even in Russia, Iwan III. (1462-1505)
seems to have restored to the peasantry the right of migration, of which
they had been deprived by the invasion of the Mongols, nor did they lose
it again until the great troubles at the beginning of the seventeenth
century, which gave the ruling power to the nobility.(434)

Where civilization has reached its highest development, the irresistible
power of public opinion, governed by the ideas of the universal
brotherhood of man and of democratic equality, causes the abolition of all
irredeemable and of all hereditary relations of servitude.(435)(436)(437)



                              Section LXXIV.


The Same Subject Continued.


It cannot be doubted, that an entirely direct leap from complete servitude
to complete freedom may be attended by many evils. No man is "born
free,"(438) but only with a faculty for freedom; but this faculty must be
developed. The knowledge and respect for law, and the self-control, which
are the conditions and limits of freedom, are never acquired without
labor, seldom without the making of grave mistakes, and never except
through the practice of them. As a rule, both parties, masters as well as
servants, would like to get rid immediately of all the inconveniences of
the former condition and yet continue to enjoy its advantages. The
servant, for instance, will now yield no more the specific obedience of
former times, but demands still specific mildness from the land-owner, or
loaner of capital, his former master. It is inevitable that there should
be complaints on both sides.(439) But in the higher stages of economic
culture, the relation of paternal protection and childlike obedience
between the different classes of the people, which, even in medieval
times, never obtained in all its purity, is certainly unrecallable. Hence
it is, that all hope of a better condition of things is based only on
this, that the lower classes may as soon as possible attain to true
independence.(440)



                              Section LXXV.


The Same Subject Continued.


Even in antiquity, the principal nations of the world could not keep the
humanizing influence of civilization from making itself felt on their
slaves. And if they did not go so far as to bring about the total
abolition of slavery, it is unhesitatingly to be attributed to their
religious inferiority.(441) In Athens, during the Peloponnesian war, it
was almost impossible to distinguish the slaves from the poorer freemen by
their looks or dress. Their treatment was mild in proportion as desertion
was easier by reason of the smallness of the state or the frequency of
war. It was forbidden to beat them; and only a court of justice could
punish them with death.(442) Emancipation, in individual cases, was very
frequent, and the names of Agoratos and of the law-reviser Nicomachos show
how great a part an emancipated slave might play in the nation.(443) The
helot system of the Lacedemonians preserved much longer a great deal more
of medieval barbarism; but even here, we may infer from the frequent
uprisings and emancipations of the helots, from their services in war
etc., that their lot was made less hard than it had been.(444)

Among the Romans, with whom war and conquest were so long considered(445)
the principal means of acquisition, slavery was relatively very hard.(446)
But, later, there came to be several different grades of slavery (_servi
ordinarii_ and _mediastini_ etc.); and in slavery, every gradation denotes
some amelioration of condition.(447) The slave obtained the right to
possess resources of his own (_peculium_).(448) In addition to this,
emancipation became much more frequent in the later republic; so much so,
that Augustus considered it necessary to pass laws taxing frivolous
emancipation. (_L. Aelia Sentia_ and _Furia_.)(449) Where men like
Terence, Roscius, Tiro, Phædrus and the father of Horace rose from the
condition of slavery, the treatment of slaves cannot have been entirely
brutalizing.(450) Under the emperors who oppressed the free citizens,
legislation was directed more than ever towards the protection of the
slaves.(451) Instead of permanent slavery, a condition of things was
introduced and became more general every day, one in which the bondman
might contract a legal marriage, have property of his own, and in which he
was protected against an arbitrary increase of the quota he had to pay his
master, whether in money or produce, although he still remained bound to
the land. This class was formed not only of the _originarii_, or those
born into it, but also of a large number of impoverished freemen,
barbarian prisoners of war etc.(452)(453)



                 Section LXXVI. (Appendix To Chapter IV.)


The Domestic Servant System.


In most countries the servant system developed itself gradually out of
serfdom, or of some condition of tutelage analogous thereto. This is seen
most clearly in the long continuance of forced service, by which the
subjects of the lord of the fee were compelled to allow their children to
remain in the court of the lord as servants, either without any
remuneration whatever, or for very low wages fixed by long continued
custom.(454) Here, also, belongs the right of correction, so generally
accorded to masters in former times. In the higher stages of civilization,
the whole relation is wont to be resolved more and more into freedom of
competition; and this process is wont to take place earliest and most
strikingly in the cities. Where vast numbers of men are brought together,
demand and supply of services meet most easily. The nearer in the course
of this development the servant system approaches to piece-wages and
day-wages, the shorter does the customary (presumptive) duration of the
contract last,(455) the more voluntary is the period of leave-taking by
both parties;(456) the more does the entire relation tend to be limited to
single acts of service agreed upon in advance (§ 39), and the more
frequently do both parties endeavor to supply the place of the domestic
servants by workmen who receive wages and live outside of the family.(457)
The extreme of this direction at present is the servant-institutes in
cities, the more movable and more democratic character of which finds
expression in this, that they have extended the use of personal services
to a lower circle of consumers than could previously have thought of
employing them. In English agriculture this transition was completed
mainly in the third decade of this century. The change was unquestionably
favorable to the improvement of the art of agriculture, but it was
frequently damaging to the social relation existing between the rich and
the poor in the country.(458) In Germany, the sale of the public domains,
conscription and _Landwehr_ duty have operated in this direction.(459)
Hence it is, for instance, that in Prussia, the servants, in 1816, were
15.18 per cent. of the entire male population over 14 years of age, and
17.84 per cent. of the entire female population over 14 years of age. In
1861, on the other hand, there were only 11.88 and 12.93 per cent.,
respectively, while the number of day laborers and workmen, in the same
time, increased from 16.29 per cent. males, and 10.87 per cent. females,
to 20.95 and 16.65 per cent., respectively.(460) In most civilized
countries, the grade of society from which servants are recruited grows
lower and lower as the spirit of independence extends to the deeper strata
of humanity.(461)

The servant class may continue a long time yet to be a school of
development for those of the lower classes, who, ripe in body, are not
intellectually independent; just as the duty of bearing arms has been a
school of improvement for all male youth. Life-long servants are as seldom
to be desired as life-long soldiers.

In most places, the long transition period from complete bondage to free
competition was governed by a police system of wardship, which was very
unfavorable to the servant class. Such especially was the provision that
all young people of the lower classes, who could not expressly show that
they were employed under the paternal roof or at some trade, should be
compelled to seek some outside or inland work;(462) such also was the
strict prohibition of "usurious" wage-claims, and the "decoying" of
servants from their masters.(463) Besides, a great many provisions
relating to servants, and based on views belonging to an older economic
condition, were intended to throw obstacles in the way of farm hands and
country servants(464) becoming servants in towns; and, on the other hand,
to facilitate the speedy abandonment of service in all cases in which the
servant desired to marry.(465) All these preferences in favor of one class
of contractors, and at the cost of another, are radically opposed to the
modern political spirit. The laws relating to servants are wont, in our
day, to have but one object, the prevention, by registration with the
police, of fraud and breach of contract, and of all strife and litigation
by the legally formulating of the conditions which are very frequently
tacitly understood.

The ideal of the relation of master and servant is attained when it is
considered by both as a part of the life of a Christian family.(466)
Hence, benevolence on the one side and devotedness on the other, fidelity
on both sides, disinterested care for the present and future interests
each of the other _tanquam sua_; and especially for each other's eternal
future. Whether this state of mutual feeling is best furthered by the
patriarchal system, by a police system, or by free competition, it is
scarcely possible to say. It may, however, be affirmed that it depends
upon a mutual and continued denial of self not easy to attain. Where it
really prevails, all the advantages of the piece-work system are obtained
in a worthy and organic manner, and without its atomistic drawbacks.(467)




                                Chapter V.


Community Of Goods And Private Property. Capital--Property.



                             Section LXXVII.


Capital.--Importance Of Private Property.


As human labor can attain its full development, only on the supposition
that personal freedom is allowed to develop to its full economic
importance and dimensions, so capital can develop its full productive
power only on the supposition of the existence of the freedom of personal
property. Who would save anything, that is, give up present enjoyment, if
he were not certain of future enjoyment?(468) The legitimacy of private
property has, since the time of Locke,(469) been based, by the greater
number of political economists, on the right inherent in every workman,
either to consume or to save the product of his labor. But it should not
be forgotten here that, at least in the higher stages of the economy of a
nation, scarcely any work or saving is possible without the coöperation of
society. And society must be conceived not only as the sum-total of the
now living individuals that compose it, but in its entire past, present
and future, and also as being led and borne onward by eternal ideas and
wants.(470)



                             Section LXXVIII.


Socialism And Communism.


In opposition to this, the idea of a community of goods has found favor,
especially in times when the four following conditions met:(471)

A. _A well-defined, confrontation of rich and-poor._ So long as there is a
middle class of considerable numbers between them, the two extremes are
kept, by its moral force, from coming into collision. There is no greater
preservative against envy of the superior classes and contempt for the
inferior, than the gradual and unbroken fading of one class of society
into another. _Sperate miseri, cavete felices!_ In such a state of social
organization, we find the utmost and freshest productive activity at every
round of the great ladder. Those at the bottom are straining every nerve
to rise, and those higher up, not to fall below. But where the rich and
the poor are separated by an abyss which there is no hope of ever
crossing, how pride on the one side and envy on the other rage! and
especially in the _foci_ of industry, the great cities, where the deepest
misery is found side by side with the most brazen-faced luxury, and where
the wretched themselves conscious of their numbers, mutually excite their
own bad passions. It cannot, unfortunately, be denied, that when a nation
has attained the acme of its development, we find a multitude of
tendencies prevailing to make the rich richer and the poor, at least
relatively poorer, and thus to diminish the numbers of the middle class
from both sides; unless, indeed, remedial influences are brought to bear
and to operate in a contrary direction.(472)

B. _A high degree of the division of labor_, by which, on the one hand,
the mutual dependence of man on man grows ever greater, but by which, at
the same time, the eye of the uncultured man becomes less and less able to
perceive the connection existing between merit and reward, or service and
remuneration. Let us betake ourselves in imagination to Crusoe's island.
There, when one man, after the labor of many months, has hollowed out a
tree into a canoe, with no tools but an animal's tooth, it does not occur
to another who, in the meantime was, it may be, sleeping on his bear-skin,
to contest the right of the former to the fruit of his labor. How
different this from the condition of things where civilization is
advanced, as it is in our day; where the banker, by a single stroke of his
pen, seems to earn a thousand times more than a day-laborer in a week;
where, in the case of those who loan money on interest, their debtors too
frequently forget how laborious was the process of acquiring the loaned
capital by the possessors, or their predecessors in ownership. More
especially, we have, in times of "over-population," whole masses of honest
men asking not alms, but only work, an opportunity to earn their bread,
and yet on the verge of starvation.(473)

C. _A violent shaking or perplexing of public opinion in its relation to
the feeling of Right, by revolutions_, especially when they follow rapidly
one on the heels of another, and take opposite directions. On such
occasions, both parties have generally prostituted themselves for the sake
of the favor of the masses; and the latter have become conscious of the
changes which the force of their arms may effect. In this way, it is
impossible that until order is again entirely established, the reins of
power should not be slackened in many ways at the demands of the
multitude. In this way, too, they are stirred up to the making of
pretentious claims which it is afterwards very difficult to silence. In
every long and far-reaching revolution, whether undertaken in the interest
of the crown, the nobility or the middle classes, we find, side by side
with the seed it intended to sow, the tares of communism sprout up.

D. _Pretensions of the lower classes in consequence of a democratic
constitution._ Communism is the logically not inconsistent exaggeration of
the principle of equality. Men who always hear themselves designated as
"the sovereign people," and their welfare as the supreme law of the state,
are more apt than others to feel more keenly the distance which separates
their own misery from the superabundance of others. And, indeed, to what
an extent our physical wants are determined by our intellectual mould! The
Greenlander feels comfortable in his mud hut, with his oil-jug. An
Englishman in the same condition would despair.(474)(475)



                              Section LXXIX.


Socialism And Communism. (Continued.)


What has just been said will serve to explain why, in the following four
periods of the world's history, socialistic and communistic ideas have
been most widespread: among the ancients at the time of the decline of
Greece,(476) and in that of the degeneration of the Roman Republic;(477)
among the moderns in the age of the Reformation,(478) and again, in our
own day.(479)



                              Section LXXX.


Socialism And Communism. (Continued.)


We thus see, that the attempts made by socialism and communism are, by no
means, phenomena unheard of in the past, and peculiar to modern times, as
the blind adherents and opponents of them would have us believe. They are
rather diseases of the body social, which have affected every highly
civilized nation at certain periods of its existence. If the body be too
weak to react healthily and curatively (§ 84), the evil is very apt to
lead to the decline of all true freedom and order. The communist, viewing
all other things, especially the organization of the state, only as
instruments to supply his material and absolute wants, considers the
liberal either as a fool who is ever pursuing the phantoms of the brain,
or as a knave who covers his own selfishness under the mask of the public
welfare.(480) Hence the adherents of communism are satisfied with any form
of government which seems to offer them most, and this a ruthless
despotism can do, at least, for the moment. And, although they are ever
ready for any revolution in the form of government, and easily to be won
over to it, they are most readily captivated by a despotic revolution. On
the other hand, when communism seriously threatens all that constitutes
the wealth of a people, the owners of that wealth are compelled to fly to
any refuge which holds out the promise to protect them from it, although
by seeking that same refuge they may destroy their own political
freedom.(481) The Achean league, which under the leadership of Aratos, the
"enemy of tyrants," had come into existence, promising so much hope,
beheld itself later, and mainly through fear of the contagious effects of
Spartan socialism under Cleomenes, compelled to unite with the
Macedonians, that is, to give themselves up entirely. (§ 204).



                              Section LXXXI.


Community Of Goods.


We now, for the present, turn our gaze from the frightful revolution,
destructive of all civilization, which would necessarily precede the
establishment of a community of goods,(482) and inquire what would be the
consequences. Among angels ("gods and sons of gods" of Plato) and mere
animals, a community of goods might, perhaps, exist without producing
injury. And so, too, it might exist among men bound one to the other by
the bonds of the truest love. The life of every model family is
accompanied by a species of community of goods.(483) But in more extensive
social organizations, this love is never found except as an element of the
most exalted religious enthusiasm, which, as a rule, is of very short
duration; of which the Acts of the Apostles (II, 44 ff, 32 ff, V, I, II)
affords us the best known and most beautiful example.(484)

Where this love does not exist, each participant in the community of goods
will, as a rule, seek to do the least and enjoy the most possible.(485) In
a society of one hundred thousand members, each individual would be
interested in the results of its aggregate frugality only indirectly, and
only to the extent of a one-hundred thousandth part of the whole; that is,
practically, not at all.(486) Individual selfishness would expend itself
entirely on the division of what the whole community produced. It would,
consequently, and almost always be detrimental to the whole, and to the
other individuals of the society; whereas, at present, it does so only in
exceptional cases. When Louis Blanc, as Mably had before him, recommended
that the _point d' honneur_ should take the place of the _interêt
personnel_, as a spur to production, and a check on consumption, and cited
the army as an illustration of its workings, he forgot, among other
things, the thirty cases in which the _code militaire_ pronounces sentence
of death on the violators of its provisions. And, as a matter of fact, the
Münster Anabaptists could not help punishing with death every
transgression of their communistic precepts.(487) If, in a community in
which the principles of communism were rigorously carried out, all the
burthens and enjoyments of life were equal, and equally divided according
to the ideas of the crowd, men like Thaer, Arkwright, and others of their
class, who now provide bread for hundreds of thousands from their studies
and laboratories, would then be able, at most, with a rake and shovel, to
provide food for three or four. The division of labor, with its infinite
amount of productive force, would, for the most part, cease. Nor would the
consequence be that the humbler classes would be freed from work of a
coarse, mechanical, unintellectual and severe nature; but that the higher
classes would be dragged down to engage in it likewise. And what an
increase there would be in the number of consumers at the same time! Every
man would, with a light heart, follow the most imperious of human impulses
if the whole community were to educate his children. But we have seen that
a community of goods is desired most urgently in times of over-population.
Hence, here it would make the evil greater yet, by increasing consumption
and diminishing production.

Where there are now one thousand wealthy persons, and one hundred thousand
proletarians, there would be, after one generation, no one wealthy and two
hundred thousand proletarians. Misery and want would be universal.(488)
For the purpose of giving the crowd a very agreeable,(489) but rather
short-lived period of pleasure, a period simply of transition, almost all
that constitutes the wealth of a nation, all the higher goods of life,
would have to be cast to the waves, and henceforth all men would have to
content themselves with the gratifications afforded by potatoes, brandy
and the pleasures of the most sensual of appetites. And then, the equal
education of all, demanded by the communists, would have no result but
this, that no one would acquire a higher scientific training.(490) But,
after all, there lurks concealed in communism much more of envy than is
generally supposed.



                             Section LXXXII.


The Organization Of Labor.


Most theoretical adherents of the doctrine of a community of goods,
feeling(491) more or less the weight of the above objections, have
supplemented it with the idea of an organization of labor(492) or the
centralized superintendence of all production and consumption, either by
the government already existing, or by one to be created anew. Such a
government would be, of course, a despotism such as the world has scarcely
yet seen, a Cæsaro-Papacy, usurping both the place and power of Father of
the universal Family.(493) But the evils mentioned above would be entailed
none the less. Every incentive which now moves man to industry or
frugality would disappear, and nothing remain but universal philanthrophy;
or, if you will, but patriotism, virtues which are not wanting even now.
Even guardianship of the government newly created would be carried on in a
very loose manner; for it would be exercised without any feeling of
personal interest, even in the most favorable case supposable. It is well
known and easily understood, that state industries are never engaged in,
in the long run, with the same zeal, nor crowned with the same success, as
competing private industries. It is well known, too, how intimate the
connection is between the political freedom of a people and their economic
production; that, for instance, England's greater wealth, as compared with
that of Turkey, depends, most largely, on the freedom that obtains in the
former country and the servitude that prevails in the latter.(494) And we
may inquire just here, what the result would be, if the despotism of
government should go ten times farther that it has ever gone in Turkey,
when, moreover, the despot who led the state, was not an individual with
his few officials, but the whole crowd, with its million eyes and million
hands. It would, practically, be to give every producer an escort of a
policeman and a revenue agent, as if he were a prisoner.

And where would be the gain? A division of wealth which would seem unjust
to many would exist now as well as before, because the idle and the
unskillful would receive the same reward as the most industrious and
skillful.(495) The opposition of one class of society to another, so much
complained of, would continue. The only difference would be, that whereas,
it now comes from the weak, it would then come from the strong.(496)
Compulsory association is certainly more prolific in strife and crime than
is a state of society in which everybody manages his own affairs.

A journey on foot, in company with others, is allowed, on all hands, to be
a very good test of friendship. But, a community of goods would, in the
strictest sense of the word, be a journey on foot through the whole of
life with numberless "friends." Here, every one would believe himself
entitled to possess whatever pleased him. And, who would decide; since so
many communists preach the dissolution and extinction of all government,
and the reign of anarchy? Besides, there can be no doubt, that the
difference of human talents and human wants, would soon, spite of every
law, lead to a difference in property again. Hence, that first revolution
would have to be repeated from time to time--a real Sisyphus labor! No
sooner have the bees produced anything, than the drones come, and divide
anew!



                             Section LXXXIII.


The Organization Of Labor. (Continued.)


Experience, however, teaches us, that, in all the lower stages of
civilization, a community of goods exists to a greater or lesser
extent.(497) The institution of private property has been more fully
evolved out of this condition of things, only in proportion as well-being
and culture have been developed as cause and effect of such well-being.
Thus, among most nations of hunters and fishermen, the idea of private
property was unknown when these nations were first discovered. This is,
indeed, very natural. Their chief spring of production flows as if of
itself, apparently inexhaustible; and the hunter can hardly think of such
a thing as saving any of his booty.(498) And, among nomadic nations, the
land is a great meadow held in common; and the industry of plunder is
considered, as it is in all inferior stages of civilization, especially
honorable.(499) The _conquistadores_ of Peru found there something very
like a community of goods, under the despotic guardianship of the state,
viz.: a yearly division of all lands among the people, in proportion to
their rank; the cultivation of these lands in common, under the
superintendence of the state, and to the sound of music. But, at the stage
of civilization that Peru was then in, land is about the only resource
possessed. The results were the usual ones. A country like Peru, with only
one city, no beasts of burthen, no plows, no trades and no commerce,
cannot possibly be rich.(500) That the constitution of Lycurgus
established a sort of community of goods among the Spartans, is well
known. I need only recall the public education, the meals in common, the
authorization of stealing,(501) the prohibition of trade, of the precious
metals and fine furniture, the equal division of property and the
inalienable character of the land(502) etc. With such laws, Sparta could
neither be, nor desire to become, wealthy. Of all Greek states of any
historical importance, it preserved longest the economic peculiarities
belonging to a low stage of civilization. Among most modern nations, the
fundamental idea of their land laws, which had their origin in the middle
ages, is, that each family is only the usufructuary, and that the
community is the sovereign proprietor of the soil. This community of
landed possession finds expression, among other things, in the vast extent
of communal woods and pasturages, in the varied intersecting of parcels of
land one by the other, which, indeed, change proprietors from time to
time, and in the common working of the land, carried as far as possible
etc.(503) In all medieval times,(504) not only the individual is
considered an owner of the land, but, over and above him, the family. At
the same time, we are wont to find existing an amount of mortmain property
in the hands of corporations, monastery lands, crown lands and domains of
very great importance.(505) All these institutions have declined in number
and shown a disposition to disappear, in proportion as national husbandry
or economy has grown more productive.



                             Section LXXXIV.


The Organization Of Labor. (Continued.)


To this tendency we find, indeed, another, and a no less powerful one,
opposed. Everywhere as civilization advances, the sphere of action of the
state grows larger, and the ends it serves more numerous.

In its origin, government was established to preserve only the external
security of its subjects. By degrees, it comes to look after their
internal legal security, by enforcing internal peace, prohibiting revenge
for bloodshed etc. It next extends its care to the well-being, the
culture, and even to the comfort of the people. But the claims of the
state must grow in the same proportion as the service it renders. While
Lowe, in 1822, estimated the yearly net income of the British people at
£251,000,000; the government expenses,(506) in 1813 and 1814, averaged
£106,000,000, and these sums were voluntarily devoted to public purposes
by parliament. And so, between 1685 and 1841, the population of England
more than trebled its numbers, But, in the same period of time, the outlay
of the state increased forty fold. (_Macaulay_.) Simultaneously with this
development of things, it becomes more and more usual by the exercise of
the power of eminent domain and others like it, to sacrifice private
rights, acquired by the very best of titles, to the preponderating common
good. We may allude, further, to the duty, universally imposed in modern
times, of performing military service, to the national systems of public
instruction in so many countries; to the large number of societies,
joint-stock companies, popular holidays; but particularly to the
associations for insurance of every description. And so it may, indeed, be
claimed that we have come nearer to a community of goods than could have
been dreamed of a hundred years ago.(507) And yet, these are, for the most
part, institutions in which we find reflected the peculiar strength and
solidity of our age. Whoever wishes to compare the power of one people
with that of another, must take into account not only the elements which
constitute their intellectual and physical force, but especially their
inclination to permit these elements to coöperate for public
purposes.(508)

We may now inquire: At what point does this increasing community cease to
be a gain? This is as easily determined generally, as it is difficult to
say what the limit to it is in particular instances. Progress in the
direction of a community of interests of this nature is beneficial, only
so long but certainly as long as it corresponds with the feeling
entertained by the community, that they have interests in common. Hence it
is, that such a noble kind of communism reigns in art and literature, one
which causes the stronger to willingly labor for the weaker, and with the
greatest success.(509) And so, too, the christian care of the poor, even
were it carried to the height of the Gospel counsels (Luke, 3:11), would
be no direct obstacle in the way of the development of a nation's public
economy, provided it were given, and accepted, only as christian
benevolence. Every approximation towards a community of goods should be
effected by the love of the rich for the poor, not by the hatred of the
poor for the rich. If all men were true Christians, a community of goods
might exist without danger. But then, also, the institution of private
property would have no dark side to it. Every employer would give his
workmen the highest wages possible, and demand in return only the smallest
possible sacrifice.(510)(511)



                              Section LXXXV.


The Right Of Inheritance.


The right of inheritance to resources has its origin in a combination of
the idea of the family with the idea of property. And, indeed, this
combination of ideas is a very natural one. The larger portion of mankind
consider the pleasures of the family as the highest attainable, and
endeavor, whenever their economic means make it at all possible, to secure
them. At the same time, the selfishness of most men is not confined to
their own persons, but extends also to their posterity. Hence it is that
bed and board, _eonnubium_ and _commercium_, have, from time immemorial,
been considered correlative ideas; and, to all the more logical
socialists, a community of wives (or celibacy)(512) is as dear as a
community of goods.(513) (§ 245.) And in practice, the greater number of
nations of hunters, who, according to our conceptions, have no knowledge
of a real family and no knowledge of property, have a custom of burying
with the dead the things they used, to kill their cattle etc., or to
deprive minor children of their inheritance.(514)



                             Section LXXXVI.


Economic Utility Of The Right Of Inheritance.


The certainty, that the material welfare of their children depends, in
great part, on their industry and frugality, is one of the most powerful
incentives to good, in the case of most men. And this is the basis of the
economic utility of the family right of inheritance.(515) There is
scarcely any other institution which opposes over-population with such
efficiency, for the reason, that the obstacle placed in its way here is
placed very directly, at the point where it can make itself felt most,
viz.: in the life of the family itself. The weaker the family feeling, the
less does the abolition of the right of inheritance interfere with the
economic interests of a nation. Hence, for instance, it is, that taxes
imposed upon legacies, bequests, testamentary gifts etc., are less
objectionable in proportion as they affect only those in the more remote
degrees of relationship in which inheritance is something merely
accidental. While, when a nation is yet in the intermediate stages of
civilization, the _family_ right of inheritance seems to be very strong,
especially as regards landed property, a consequence of the fact, that a
superior kind of title to such property is recognized to exist in the
family; at a period, when individualism becomes more developed, the
liberty of devise by will is wont to prevail more and more.(516) Then the
right of inheritance becomes, so to speak, a more elevated species of
personal property, a prolongation of the same beyond the grave. Should
testamentary freedom be too much hampered, selfishness would manifest
itself in a way much more detrimental to economic interests, viz.: in the
consumption of wealth, during the lifetime of its owner. Every man would
be but a life annuitant of his own property.

But, at the same time, in periods of moral decline, complete freedom may
degenerate so as to produce evils equally great. The wealthy Boeotians, in
the later days of Hellenic history, were wont to form themselves into
dissolute drinking companies; and not only the childless, but even fathers
of families made over their property to these companies, limiting their
offspring to a portion which it was made their duty to let them have. It
was so in Rome, also, in Cicero's time, when every acquaintance of
standing took it very ill if not remembered in the will of the testator,
and where Octavian, for instance, in the last twenty years of his reign,
received about 70,000,000 thalers through legacies left him by his
"friends."(517) Here, the repeal of the law making it obligatory on
testators to leave a certain proportion of their wealth to their children
would remove the last safe-guard of their material welfare.(518)



                             Section LXXXVII.


Landed Property.


As land, in its uncultivated state, has neither been produced by man, nor
can be entirely consumed by him, the above demonstration of the necessity
of private property cannot without any more ado, be extended to land.(519)
Hence, individual property in land is everywhere much more recent than
individual property in capital.(520)

But a certain expenditure of capital and labor is necessary that land may
be used productively, and, in most instances, this employment of capital
and labor is of long duration, irrevocable in the very nature of things,
and one the fruits of which can be reaped only after some time has
elapsed. Now, this cooperation of capital and labor is such, that no one
would undertake to employ them in the cultivation of the land, had he not
the strongest assurance of possessing it. Hence, agriculture in its most
rudimentary stage supposes ownership of the land, at least from the time
that it is "tickled with the hoe," until it "smiles with the harvest;" or,
to express it more accurately, all the time intervening between the work
of the plow and the labor of the sickle. The more, afterwards, population
and civilization increase, the more products must be wrung from the soil.
But this can be accomplished only by means of its more _intensive_
cultivation (higher farming), by lavishing a greater amount of capital and
labor on it, and, as a rule, by extending the circle of agricultural
operations by means of combinations more and more artificial. Hence, the
progress of civilization demands an ever increasing fixity, and a more
pronounced shaping of landed property (the _specification_ of jurists), in
the interests of all who share in this progress, and even of those who own
no landed property themselves. Were there no property in land, every one
would find it more difficult and laborious to gratify his want of
agricultural products;(521) and the products themselves would be of an
inferior kind.

Thus, for instance, in Camargo, the lackmus was formerly prepared from
plants to be had "free" in the woods. It was then, however, much dearer
than it is now that the plants are artificially raised on landed
property.(522) It is otherwise with the fisheries. The appropriation of
rivers or seas would not tend to increase the abundance of their products,
and hence this appropriation is, on the whole, rare.(523)



                            Section LXXXVIII.


Landed Property. (Continued.)


Whenever this admixture of capital and labor with land has taken place to
no great extent, private property in land is not found developed in any
degree. Thus, there are even now many half-civilized countries in which
the land is forfeited because not tilled for many years, and where it may
be occupied by the first person who will cultivate it.(524) In Europe,
common possession of forests and pasture lands asserted itself much longer
than that of arable land, because, in the case of the former, labor and
capital play a much less important part in the management of them. And
yet, even in the case of arable land etc., and, in the highest stages of
civilization, the property-quality is yet less developed than the
property-quality of capital. How seldom do we find _fidei commissa_ of
capital, or capital juridically tied up. We find that the law of all
ancient nations drew a marked distinction between moveable and immoveable
property, and that the power of disposing of the former by sale, pledge,
in dowry, partition etc., was a much freer one. And even now, the police
power which may be exercised over moveable property is much more
restricted than that over houses and land.(525) The justice of the
exclusive right of possession to what one has earned and saved is obvious
to every one. On the other hand, the appropriation of "original and
indestructible natural forces" has its basis not so much in justice as in
the general good; and the state has always considered itself entitled to
attach to the "monopoly of land," which it accorded to the first
possessor, all kinds of limitations and conditions in the interest of the
common good, and sometimes to consider private property in land in the
light of a semi-public function.(526) I may instance the feudal principles
of the latter portion of the middle ages, which are so far removed from
our ideas of private property in land; and yet, of which many echoes are
heard, even in our day, and are not without their influence in practice.
Thus, further, for instance, even in England, the greater number of the
poor-rates, of taxes for the support of the established church, the
maintenance of public highways etc., are heaped upon the rent of land.
Many socialists have proposed to make the state the sole proprietor of the
soil,(527) sometimes adding the condition, that the previous private
owners should be compensated in capital, when it would be at least
supposable that private capital might be enticed to cultivate it, if long
and sure leases of it were made. This would be a "good" demesne-husbandry,
extending over the entire country. We need only glance at those kingdoms
in which something analogous is to be found, especially the despotisms of
the east,(528) to divine that such a system does not suffice to insure the
real productiveness of a nation's economy.(529)




                               Chapter VI.


Credit.



                             Section LXXXIX.


Credit In General.


Credit(530) is the power of disposition over the goods of another,(531)
voluntarily granted in consideration of the mere promise of the
counter-value.(532) As Franklin says: A good pay is master of another
man's purse. Hence, it is evident that whoever would obtain credit must be
believed to possess the ability as well as the intention to fulfill his
promise. Where this belief is based simply on the opinion entertained of
the person of the debtor, we speak of personal credit,(533) in
contradistinction especially to the credit based on bailment, pledge,
hypothecation etc. The longer the time between the making of the promise
and the period fixed for its fulfillment, the less certain is the latter,
where the security is simply the person of the debtor. It is chiefly in
very uncivilized nations and also in nations in their decrepitude, and
during periods of anarchy, and in despotisms, that personal security
stands higher than any other. The same is true, though for other reasons,
in very energetic civilized nations, where the people put a high estimate
on the element of labor in their economy, among whose members legal
security is, indeed, found, but where the peculiar sensitiveness of
speculation would be too much hampered by the more sluggish nature of
other credits; as, for instance, in North America, and even in ancient
Rome. Civilized nations that have reached the stationary economic state,
on this account much prefer the greater security and the absence of care
which accompany non-personal credit.(534) In estimating the ability of the
debtor to meet his promise, we must take into account, especially, the
disposable character of his resources; otherwise it would be impossible to
understand why the merchant may so frequently obtain a loan on his stock
equal to its whole value, while the owner of land can place it as security
only to the extent of half its value.

Credit, on the whole, grows in importance with an advance in civilization,
and this is true especially of credit intended for productive purposes.
This is a consequence of the greater division of labor which causes
unfinished products to be put on the market more and more
frequently,--products which come to have a value only after some time, but
which, when that time has elapsed, have present value. And, indeed, as the
world advances and civilization grows, it becomes much easier to forecast
the future with certainty. The future, also, then becomes more a source of
solicitude, and fixed capital, as a consequence, plays a part which grows
daily more important. The limit to the development of credit is this: it
is safe only when the debtor invests his borrowed goods in the production
of, to say the least, their equivalent. This is why the personality of the
state, clothed with immortality and with a formally boundless power of
taxation, is so often seduced into engaging in transactions of credit
which are never self-discharged.(535) The social diseases of panics and of
extravagant enterprises stand in the same relation to credit that unbelief
and superstition do to true religion.(536) (_Schäffle_.)



                               Section XC.


Credit--Effects Of Credit.


As regards the effects of credit, we may remark, that it is as powerless
directly to produce new capital as is the division of labor to produce new
workmen. To every credit of the creditor corresponds a debit of the
debtor. As Turgot said: _Tout credit est un emprunt_.(537)(538)(539) But,
on the other hand, credit facilitates the transmission of the elements of
production, especially of capital, from one hand to another.(540) When,
therefore, the debtor employs the capital that he has borrowed, more
productively than the creditor would have done, the whole country is a
gainer; as it is a loser, on the contrary, when a person engaged in
industry advances to the idler, the frugal man to the spendthrift, the
solid man to the wild speculator. In declining nations, where every new
development hastens decay, the latter alternative may be the prevailing
one; and, especially here, may the usurious giving of credit by the shrewd
to the simple lead to ruinous debtor-slavery. Among a vigorous and
energetic people, the former is apt to govern, as it is only by the
productive employment of the loans made that they are permanently enabled
to pay interest. Here credit is an invaluable means, not only of putting
idle capital in motion, and of making active capital still more active,
but especially of concentrating capital, by which it may gain as much in
productive power as labor does by the coöperation of labor. This is
effected, very frequently, by means of joint-stock companies, the
principle of which recommends them especially in enterprises where
stationary capital is required rather than circulating capital, and where
capital generally plays a greater part than labor; and where this labor
can be subjected to provisions which may be accurately laid down
beforehand; as, for instance, in the case of docks, insurance companies,
banks,(541) etc. Banks, then, become real reservoirs of capital, provided
they are properly and judiciously established and managed; real reservoirs
which receive in one place the capital which is superfluous elsewhere, in
order to supply some other place with that which is necessary to it. The
more confidence increases, the more are even the smallest driblets of
capital awakened from their slumbers, and made active and productive. It
is only by means of credit that the help of foreign capital can be
obtained for home production. Indeed, credit, considered as an exchange of
probable future goods against actually existing goods, is one of the
principal functions of the temporal solidarity of the economy of nations.
(_Schäffle_.) Without credit, there would be very little place for
speculation proper.

We may see how the possibility of giving and receiving credit promotes
wealth, by contemplating the poorer classes, whose poverty, both as cause
and effect, is very closely related to the absence of credit. And here we
have a suggestion of the reverse to the bright side of the picture of
credit, analogous to that mentioned in § 62 of the coöperation of labor,
viz.: that it tends to intensify inequality among men. The man who is
distinguished by the amount of his wealth, or by his position is naturally
known to a much wider circle than others are. From which it follows, that
he may, by the way of credit, increase his power, already so much greater
in the economic world, by a much larger multiplier.(542) Hence, it need
not surprise us, that the great obtain credit from those in a lower
position, at least as frequently as they give them credit in turn.

On the side of the creditor, the possibility of making loans is a powerful
incentive to frugality. Were there no credit, those who were not in a
condition to employ their capital productively would make savings only
within very narrow limits.(543)



                               Section XCI.


Debtor Laws.


Private credit is always conditioned, and in a great many ways, by the
situation of the whole nation's business; in other words, by their
politico-economical situation. It is especially in the higher stages of
civilization, that one bankrupt may easily drag numberless others down
with him; and where the laws are bad or powerless, not even the wealthiest
man can predicate his own solvency for any length of time in advance. One
of the most important conditions of credit is the certainty that, if the
debtor's good will to meet his obligations should fail, it shall be
supplied by the compulsory process of the courts. Hence, the importance of
a judicial procedure, at once impartial, enlightened, prompt and
cheap.(544) The more vigorous the laws relating to debt are in preventing
dishonesty on the part of the debtor, the more advantageous are they to
honorable and honest debtors. Adam Smith has rightly said, that in
countries in which creditors are not completely protected by the courts,
the honorable man who borrows money is in the same condition as the
notoriously dishonest man or the spendthrift, in better governed
countries. He finds it more difficult to borrow and is obliged to pay a
higher rate of interest.(545) Rigorous debtor laws, on the other hand,
diminish in the whole nation the amount of "bad debts," that is, a not
insignificant portion of the cost of production. They, at the same time,
promote, as far as it is in the power of laws to do it, national honor and
the mutual confidence of man in man. The excellence of their debtor laws,
in their most flourishing period, was one of the principal elements which
contributed to make Athens and Rome of such importance in the history of
the world.(546)



                              Section XCII.


History Of Credit Laws.


In the history of laws relating to credit, we may distinguish, in a great
many countries, three stages of development.

A. The laws, in the first stage, are very severe. In the Germanic middle
age the insolvent was disgraced. He became the slave of his creditor (_zu
Hand und Halfter_), who might imprison him, fetter him (_stöcken und
blöcken_), and probably kill him. A Norwegian law allowed the creditor,
when his debtor would not work and his friends would not ransom him, to
take him before the court, and "to lop off from his body what part he
will, above or below."(547) To judge of these provisions correctly, it is
necessary to bear in mind the many ways in which family resources were at
this time bound and tied up, and not forget "the power of defiance in
these iron natures."(548) (_Niebuhr_.)

B. The canon law introduced milder principles. Gregory the Great had
already prohibited the holding on to the body of the debtor.(549) On this
account, during the latter portion of the middle ages, it was customary to
stipulate by contract that the provisions of the ancient law should govern
in this matter, to submit to imprisonment etc.(550) The influence of the
Roman law made it gradually more usual, in the case of insolvent debtors,
to demand no more from them than the assignment of their property for the
benefit of their creditors. This, however, led to numerous frauds; and
these became more frequent in proportion as the laws governing the
property of parties while the marriage relation existed between them, and
as executions against landed property etc. were defective.

C. Hence, in more highly civilized times, there has been a return to the
severity of earlier ages. Persons engaged in commerce, especially those
whose capital is so volatile, and to whom time is a thing so precious, can
scarcely dispense willingly with personal imprisonment for debt. Hence,
legislation on bills of exchange, sanctioned especially by imprisonment of
the person, plays a very important part in the commercial cities of the
seventeenth century, as it did, naturally, much earlier in Italy and the
Netherlands.(551) Modern laws in many cases punish the bankrupt whenever
an examination of his books, kept after approved methods, does not
demonstrate his innocence.(552) The great facility of fraudulent
bankruptcy, where commerce has attained a high degree of development and
complication; the absence of honor shown in engaging in speculation for
one's own gain with a stranger's capital, and without the real owner's
knowledge; the comparatively small number of blameless and irreproachable
bankruptcies,(553) certainly justify these provisions.(554)(555)



                              Section XCIII.


Means Of Promoting Credit.


One of the most efficient means of promoting credit consists in
legislation intended to dry up the source of bad debts, by placing
obstacles in the way of reckless or usurious credits for objects of luxury
or pleasure, to bad customers.(556) But the application of these laws
should be clear and simple as to their matter, and require no inquiries,
relating to the person, impracticable for a business man to make.(557)
Thus, for instance, a short period of limitation established by statute in
the matter of advances made for ordinary money-claims is a beneficial
restraint, as well on the creditor as on the debtor, since it prevents the
accumulation of a multitude of small debts which almost imperceptibly but
at the same time irresistibly overpower the debtor under their
weight.(558) Another efficient means is associations of business men to
circulate lists of bad debtors, and to prosecute their own demands in
common.(559) On the other hand, experience has shown that imprisonment for
debt, as a means of enforcing a creditor's claim, where the amount of the
debt is very small and such as only very poor debtors are apt to incur, is
of little service. It is even injurious, because a great many sellers
would rely on that means of compelling payment in the future instead of
demanding it immediately, as they should do in the interest both of
themselves and of their customers. As a rule, it is only rich creditors
who can resort to it with success, a class who compel payment through this
means by wringing it from the debtor's relations more frequently than from
the debtor himself. The working out of debts in correctional institutions
seems, for the same reasons, to fail of its object, since even well
governed institutions scarcely cover their current expenses from the
income derived from this source.(560) The inequitable character of
imprisonment for debt lies in this, that it punishes the unfortunate
debtor as severely as it does the malicious one. It must be clearly
distinguished from the imprisonment recognized by the courts as a
punishment for reckless or fraudulent bankruptcy.(561) We must pass a
judgment similar to that on the imprisonment of the person of the debtor
on the seizure of his wages not yet due, so far, at least, as an amount
absolutely necessary to save himself and family from want, is not
excepted. The prohibition of such seizure, beyond this, would amount to a
declaration that all workmen without capital, even the best, should be
considered unworthy of credit.(562) We may also include in this category
such laws as except from execution the necessary tools of a tradesman,
since to deprive him of them would be to prevent his employing even his
labor to satisfy(563) his creditors' claims.



                              Section XCIV.


Letters Of Respite (Specialmoratorien).


_Special letters of respite_ (_Specialmoratorien_) are a suspension of the
laws relating to debt, made in favor of an individual. (_Quinquennalia._)
They were intended to protect not only the debtor, but also the aggregate
of creditors against the short-sighted severity of one of their number.
They were wont to be given especially when the debtor showed that
immediate execution would not only have the effect of ruining himself, but
of sending his creditors away empty handed; while, if time were given him,
he would be able to satisfy every one.(564) But the granting of such
letters has, in recent times, been prohibited(565) in nearly all countries
as arbitrary, and as a species of cabinet-justice. Nor should the granting
of them be compared with the pardoning power. In the case of a pardon, the
offended State forgives. In this case it sacrifices the unquestionable
right of one party to the very doubtful advantage of another. Where such
letters are granted in great numbers, credit cannot fail to suffer.
"_Quinquinnellen gehören in die Hollen!_"

Yet in troublous times, when a great many debtors are insolvent at the
same time, the question of modifying the laws relating to debt,
temporarily, has been mooted. It has been urged on such occasions, that it
would be a matter of enormous difficulty to treat, _lege artis_, thousands
as bankrupts at once; that thousands of businesses would have to be
closed, their stocks cast upon the market at mock prices, and their
employees thrown out of employment. But, if certain privileges were to be
accorded to all who should declare themselves unable to meet their
obligations before a certain day, it would be known, at least, that the
others were in a solid condition; and this would have the effect to
strengthen the credit which had been before universally shaken. We must,
however, leaving all cases of abuse out of the question, remember, that a
really unrightful favor, granted to the debtor, may possibly entail the
ruin of his creditor. Besides, the uncertainty of the law would have a
much worse effect on credit than uncertainty as to the personal status of
individuals.(566) Where, as is the case generally in inferior stages of
civilization, debtors and creditors form two distinct classes, the
question of right is not, indeed, changed, but there is a solid basis
afforded for the political admeasurement of opposing interests. In another
work I have shown how, after great wars, land owners, who became involved
in debt, have been protected against capitalists. (See _Roscher_,
Nationalökonomik des Ackerbaues, § 137, ff.)(567)(568)





                                 Book II.


THE CIRCULATION OF GOODS.




                                Chapter I.


Circulation In General.



                               Section XCV.


Meaning Of The Circulation Of Goods.


The more highly developed the division of labor is, the more frequent and
necessary do exchanges become. While the hermit engaged in production
thinks only of his own wants, and the mere housekeeper of the wants of his
household, the man who is part of a nation and who plays a part in its
general economy, must bear in mind the MARKET in which goods of one kind
are exchanged against goods of other kinds. The greater, more various and
more changeable the conditions of this market are, the greater are the
intellectual faculties demanded to engage in it successfully, and to the
advantage of everybody concerned in it.(569) Goods intended to be
exchanged are called commodities. By the circulation of commodities is
meant their going over from one owner to another.(570) Among the principal
causes of circulation, we may mention the difference in the nature and
civilization of countries and peoples, the distinction between city and
country, the division of people into classes etc.(571) The rapidity of
circulation depends, on the one hand, on the quantity of commodities, and
on the other, on the degree to which the division of labor has been
carried. In both respects it is, therefore, an important indication of the
wealth of the nation, and of the world.

Different commodities have very different degrees of capacity for
circulation (_Circulationsfähigkeit_), that is, of certainty of finding
purchasers, and of facility of seeking purchasers. The smaller, compared
with its value, the volume and weight of a commodity are; the longer and
more conveniently it can be stored away; the more invariable and
well-known are its value in use and value in exchange: the more readily
does it go from one place to another, the more easily is it transmitted
from one period of time to another and from the possession of one person
into the possession of another. Thus, for instance, the precious metals
circulate more rapidly than industrial products; these in turn more than
raw material,(572) and immovable property circulates least rapidly of all.
An improvement in the means of transportation naturally increases the
capacity of circulation of the entire wealth of a people, and especially
of those commodities which were not before transferable as well as of
those of which the cost of transportation constituted a peculiarly large
component part of the price.(573) The greater the capacity for circulation
of any kind of goods, the greater is the power of control of its owner in
the world of trade. If we compare two men, each of whom possesses a
million of dollars, but one of whom has that million in money and the
other in land, we shall find that the former is able, for present
purposes, such as loaning to the state in case of need, aiding a
conspiracy etc., to command resources much more readily and effectively
than the latter. Under the ordinary circumstances of a nation's economy,
we find that the owner of money is very seldom in want of bread, fuel or
clothing, whereas very many owners of other property may be in want of
money.(574) True, resources which may, so to speak, take the offensive
most energetically, offer less resistance to unforeseen misfortune. The
possessor of such resources is in a condition to lose his all on the turn
of a single die. As civilization advances, the circulating capacity of a
nation's wealth increases.(575)



                              Section XCVI.


Rapidity Of Circulation.


With an advance in a people's public economy, we find an increased
rapidity of circulation connected, both as cause and effect. Every
improvement, every thing which shortens the process of production, must
facilitate and accelerate the circulation of commodities. And so, the
perfecting of the means of transport of commodities, of the media of
exchange and of credit, an increase in the number of middlemen who make it
their business to purchase in order to sell again. On the other hand, the
more rapid the circulation of wealth, the more can it promote production.
The more rapidly, for instance, the manufacturer of cloth exchanges his
wares for money, the more rapidly may he employ the money in the purchase
of new tools and the hiring of new labor; and the sooner may he appear in
the market with new cloth. It is here precisely as it is in agriculture,
which is more productive where the seed returns several times in a year
(several crops(576)) to the hand of the peasant than it is where this
happens only once. The nearer the members of the commercial organism are
to one another, the more rapid is circulation wont to be. Hence, it is
more rapid in industry than in agriculture; in retail trade than in
wholesale; in large cities than in the country; among a dense population
than among a sparse population.

The _regularity_ of circulation increases with economic culture. Its
concentration at large terminal points, its interruption by bad seasons of
the year, belong to the lower stages of the political economy of a people;
although bad harvests, floods, wars, revolutions etc. may, at any time,
lead to a sluggishness or to an arrest of circulation.



                              Section XCVII.


Freedom Of Competition.


But it is especially the freedom of circulation that increases with an
advance in civilization, and this advance, like the two preceding, first
affects the home or inland circulation. Freedom of competition, the
freedom of commerce and industry, technical expressions used to designate
freedom in general in the domain of a nation's economy, is the natural
conclusion drawn from the principles of individual independence and of
private property. Hence its development is as slow as the development of
these, and attains its full growth only in highly cultivated nations,
their colonies and dependencies. In very low stages of economic
development, the circulation of goods is hampered by the absence of legal
security; later, by privileges accorded to a great number of families,
corporate bodies, municipalities, classes, etc., and later yet by the
mighty guardianship which the state exercises by its power of legislation
and even of education.(577) Each one of these epochs constitutes the end
of the preceding one, and is milder than it was. Finally comes the period
of complete freedom, when every man is permitted to manage his own affairs
even with injury to himself, provided the injury is confined to himself.

The later times of the Roman Empire are the best illustration of how, with
the decline of the conditions which must precede freedom of competition,
that freedom itself decays.(578)

Freedom of competition unchains all economic forces, good and bad. Hence,
when the former preponderate, it hastens the time of a people's grandeur,
as it does their decline where the latter gain the upper hand.(579) We may
say of economic freedom what may be said of all other freedom, that the
removal of external constraint can be justified and produces the greater
good of the greater number only where a stern empire over self takes its
place. Without this it would not prevent or avoid idleness, usury or
over-population. Freedom must not be simply negative. It must be positive.
If on account of the immaturity or over-maturity of a people, there be no
sturdy middle class among them, unlimited competition may become what
Bazard calls a general _sauve-qui-peut_ (let the devil take the hindmost);
what Fourier designates as a _morcellement industriel_, and a _fraude
commerciale_; what M. Chevalier denominated "a battle-field on which the
little are devoured by the big;" and in such case, as Bodz-Reymond says,
the word competition, meaning simply that each one is permitted to run in
whatever direction he may see a door open to him, is but another and a new
expression for vagabondizing. But here the evil does not lie in too great
competition, but in this, that on one side there is too little
competition.(580) The opposing principle of competition is always
monopoly, that is, as John Stuart Mill says, the taxation of industry in
the interest of indolence and even rapacity; and protection against
competition is synonymous with a dispensation from the necessity to be as
industrious and clever as other people.

A protection of this nature, sufficiently effective to attain its end,
would not fail to arrest the efforts of those who had accomplished
something, and even to turn them backward. That freedom of competition is
a species of declaration of war,(581) among men considered as producers,
is certain; but, at the same time, it makes all men considered as
consumers members of one society, in which all the members are equally
interested, a fact too much overlooked by socialists.(582) It is the means
especially by which the greatest and ever increasing portion of the forces
of nature are raised to the character of the free and common property of
the human race.(583) "Man is not the favorite of nature in the sense that
nature has done everything for him, but in the sense that it has endowed
him with the ability to do everything for himself. The right of freedom of
competition may, therefore, be considered both the protection and the
image of this provision of nature." (_Zachariä._)(584)

The person, therefore, who claims or asserts an exception from the rule of
free competition, has to prove his position in every individual case,
since the burthen of proof is on him. But the duty of interference on the
part of the state is positively pointed out where any interest common to
the whole people is not in a condition to assert itself; and negatively,
when the custom which hitherto had prevented an undoubted abuse has grown
too weak to continue to perform that service. In _both_ regards I would
call attention to the protection of factory children against the
concurrent selfishness of their parents and masters.(585)(586) _Supra_, §
39.



                             Section XCVIII.


How Goods Are Paid For.--The Rent For Goods.


Payment for goods (§ 1 ff.) of any kind can be made only in other
goods.(587)(588) Hence, the greater, more varied, and the better adapted
to satisfy wants, production is, the more readily does any product find a
remunerative market; more readily in England, for instance, in spite, or
rather, because of, the great competition there, than in Greenland or
Madagascar. From this it follows that, as a rule, a person is in a better
condition to purchase more goods in proportion as he has produced more
himself. According to official accounts, the average value of a harvest of
wheat and potatoes in Prussia was formerly 332,500,000 thalers. In the
year 1850, however, it was only 262,000,000 thalers. As a matter of
course, the country people in that year could not purchase from the cities
as much as in ordinary years, by a difference of 70,000,000 thalers. This
illustrates how every class of people, who live by finding a free market
for their products, are interested in the prosperity of all other classes.
As Bastiat says: "All legitimate interests are harmonious." The more
flourishing a city, the better off are the towns around it, which furnish
it with provisions; and the richer these towns, the more flourishing is
the industry of the city which ministers to their wants.(589) It is
important that this fact should be borne steadily in mind, especially in
times of advanced civilization, when the feeling that we all have
interests in common, is too apt to grow dormant. Nothing can better serve
to awaken it again when it has become so. A nation, says Louis Blanc, in
which one portion of the people is oppressed by another, is like a man
wounded in the leg. The healthy limb is prevented by the sick one from
performing its functions.(590)



                              Section XCIX.


Freedom Of Competition And International Trade.


Does the same rule apply to the commercial intercourse of nations? Where
the feeling that all mankind constitute one vast family is stronger than
that of their political and religious diversity; where the sense of right
and the love of peace have extinguished every dangerous spark of ambition
for empire and all warlike jealousy; where, especially, their economic
interests are rightly understood on both sides, a real conflict between
the interests of two nations must always be a phenomenon of rare
occurrence, and an exception to the general rule, which should not be
admitted until it has been clearly demonstrated to exist.(591) Highly
cultivated nations generally look upon the first steps in the civilization
of a foreign people with a more favorable eye than they do on the
subsequent progress which brings such nations nearer to themselves.(592)
Yet the realization of the above mentioned conditions on all sides is
something so improbable, unpatriotic "philanthropy" something so
suspicious,(593) the greater number of mankind so incapable of development
except under the limitations of nationality, that I should observe the
total disappearance of national jealousies only with solicitude. Nothing
so much contributed to the Macedonian and Roman conquests as the
cosmopolitanism of the later Greek philosophers.(594)

As all commerce is based on the mutual dependence of the contracting
parties, we need not be surprised to find international commerce so
dependent. But this dependence need not, by any means, be equally great on
both sides. Rather is the individual or the nation which stands in most
urgent need of foreign goods or products the most dependent. Hence, it
seems that, in the commercial intercourse between an agricultural and an
industrial people, in which the former furnish food and the raw material
of manufactures, and the latter manufactured articles, the latter are the
more dependent. In case of war, for instance, it is much easier to
dispense for a long time with manufactured articles than with most
articles of food.(595) However, this condition of things is very much
modified, for the better, by all those circumstances on which the dominant
active commerce of a nation depends. It is, for instance, much easier for
the English, on account of their greater familiarity with, and knowledge
of the laws and nature of commerce, on account of their business
connections, their capital, credit and means of transportation, but more
particularly on account of the greater capacity of circulation of their
national resources, to find a new market in the stead of one that has been
closed to them, than it is for the Russians with their much more
immoveable system of public economy.(596) It is true, however, that an
effective blockade, which excluded both of these nations from all the
markets of the world, would be much more injurious to England than to
Russia.




                               Chapter II.


Prices.



                                Section C.


Prices In General.


The price of a commodity is its value in exchange expressed in the quantum
of some other definite commodity, against which it is exchanged or to be
exchanged. Hence, it is possible for any commodity to have as many
different prices as there are other kinds of commodities with which it may
be compared.(597) But whenever price is spoken of, we think only of a
comparison of the commodity whose value is to be estimated, with the
commodity which, at that time and place, is most current and has the
greatest capacity for circulation. (Money.)(598) When two commodities have
changed their price-relation to each other, it is not possible, from the
simple fact of such change of relation, to determine on which side the
change has taken place. If we find that a commodity A stands to all other
commodities, C, D, E etc., in the same relation as to price as before,
while commodity B, compared with the same, has changed its place in the
scale of prices, we may infer that B, and not A, has left its former
position.(599)

The words costly and dear, as contradistinguished from common and cheap,
both indicate a high price. We, however, call a commodity costly whose
price, compared with that of other similar commodities, is high. On the
other hand, we call a commodity dear when we compare it with itself, and
with its own average price in other places and at other times.(600)

In individual cases, the price of a commodity is determined most usually,
and at the same time most superficially, by custom; people ask and pay for
a commodity what others have asked and paid for it. If we go deeper and
inquire what originated this customary price and may continually change
it, we come to the struggle of interests between buyers and sellers. And
if science would analyze the ultimate elements of the incentives to this
struggle and the forces engaged in it, it is necessary that it should keep
in view the entire economy of the nation, and even all national life.



                               Section CI.


Effect Of The Struggle Of Opposing Interests On Price.


No where in the public economy of a people are the workings of
self-interest so apparent as in the determination of prices. When the
price of a commodity is once fixed by the conflict of opposing
interests,(601) the self-seeking of every individual dictates that he
should thereby gain as much as possible of the goods of others, and lose
as little as possible of his own. In this struggle, the victory is
generally to the stronger, and the price is higher or lower, according to
the superiority of the buyer or seller.(602) But who, in such case, is the
stronger? Political or physical superiority can turn the balance one way
or another only in very barbarous times, and especially in times when
legal security is small.(603) As a rule, it is the party in whom the
desire of holding on to his own commodities is strongest, and who is least
moved by the want of the wares of others. As in every conflict, confidence
in self, sometimes even unbounded confidence in self, is an important
element of success. A party to a contract of sale or barter, who considers
his immediate position decidedly stronger than that of the other party,
will scarcely depart from his demands. Hence it is, that in exchange, one
party so frequently holds back until the other has expressed his
terms.(604) How different is the price of the same pieces of land which a
new railroad enterprise is compelled to pay and the prices it would get
for them, from the adjoining owners, in case of the dissolution of the
company.

But the struggle to raise prices or to lower them, which is always going
on, undergoes modifications of every description among all really
commercial nations, partly through the influence of the public conscience,
which brands as inhuman and blameworthy the spoilation of the opposing
party by acts which the laws do not reach. And this consideration by the
public conscience is all the more severe in proportion as real competition
in the article sold is wanting.(605) But the chief modification in this
struggle is produced by the fact, that where civilization has advanced
farthest, every commodity is offered for sale by a great many and wanted
by a great many.(606) As soon as several seek the same object, there
naturally results a rivalry among them, which induces each to attain the
desired end, even by the making of greater sacrifices than others. The
greater the supply of a commodity is, as compared with the demand for it,
the lower is its price; the greater the demand as compared with the
supply, the higher it is. And, indeed, there is question here, not only of
the _mass_ of things supplied or demanded, but also of the _intensity_ of
the supply and demand.(607)

If the exchange-force of both contractants be equal, or, in other words,
if both, with equal knowledge, are interested in the completion of the
exchange, there results from this attitude of the parties toward each
other, what is called an equitable, or average price, in which both meet
with their deserts. Here each is a gainer, since each has parted with the
commodity which was less necessary to him, and received in exchange the
commodity which was more necessary to him. Looked at, however, from the
stand-point, not simply of a nation's but of the world's economy, the
value given and the value received are equal.(608)(609)

As a rule, the price-relation of two commodities is determined by this
relation of demand and supply,--by the desire to possess and the difficulty
of obtaining them. We must, therefore, examine on what deeper relations
supply and demand themselves depend.(610) In the case of the purchaser,
the value in use of the commodity and his own ability to pay constitute
the maximum limit of its price, which price may, however, be modified by
the cost of producing it(611) elsewhere or at another time. In the case of
the seller, the cost of production is the minimum limit, which may,
however, be extended by the cost of procuring the commodity by the
purchaser at another time or place.(612)



                               Section CII.


Demand.


The purchaser in his demand is wont to consider principally the value in
use of a commodity, according as it, in a higher or lower degree,
ministers to a necessary want, to a decency or to a luxury. The difference
of opinion as to which of these categories any given want belongs depends
not only on the nature of the country and the customs of its people, but,
for the most part, also, on the prejudices of class and on personal
individuality.(613) A reasonable man will employ only the surplus of the
first class in the satisfaction of wants of the second, and again only the
surplus of the second in the satisfaction of wants of the third.(614)

If the value in use of a commodity rises or falls, and surrounding
circumstances remain unchanged, its price also rises or falls.(615)(616)



                              Section CIII.


Demand.--Indispensable Goods.


When the supply of articles of luxury diminishes, the price of them, it is
true, rises. But as now there is a number of purchasers no longer able to
pay for them, the demand for them also decreases, and their price, as a
consequence, rises in a less degree than might be inferred from the amount
and condition of the supply merely. And so, on the other hand, an increase
of the supply which lowers the price is wont, in the case of pleasures
capable of a wide extension, such as are ministered to by fine roots,
vegetables, etc., to produce an increase of the demand, and this operates
to arrest the falling price.

It is quite otherwise, in the case of indispensable goods, as for
instance, wheat. When there is a want of such an article, men prefer to
dispense with all other articles, to some extent, rather than to practice
frugality in bread; and all the more, as bread is not so much used as
consumed rapidly, while clothes and metallic articles last a long time.
And even after an over-abundant harvest, leaving voluntary waste out of
the question, consumption is increased by a finer separating of the flour,
an increase in the amount of corn fed to cattle, and the distillation of
spirits. Hence, demand and supply by no means run in parallel lines at
every moment; and indispensable articles tend to greater perturbations in
price than those which can be dispensed with.(617)(618) The price of
grain, especially, varies in a ratio very different from the inverse ratio
of the amount of the harvest;(619) although a formula therefor expressed
in figures, like that of Gregory King, can never be applicable
universally.(620) Farmers must everywhere and always withhold a certain
amount of their harvest for seed, for home use etc., from the market. Only
absolute necessity can induce them to draw on the quantity thus laid by.
But the ratio of this part to the whole is very different in different
countries.(621) In the higher stages of civilization, where payment in
money has taken the place of payment in produce, and all other kinds of
payment, and where the cultivator of the ground pays the wages of his
laborers almost exclusively in money, so that they, like all others,
purchase what bread they require in the market; a given deficit in the
harvest must be spread over a much larger market supply; and prices,
therefore, remain much less affected than in the lower stages of
civilization.(622) And so, it is clear that a like bad harvest must affect
prices very differently, if there be a large importation or exportation of
the means of subsistence, and if several bad harvests, or several harvests
yielding more than the average have preceded.

In another respect yet, the price of indispensable commodities is very
sensitive, because here the mere fear of a future want of them has a far
deeper and wider influence, than has the fear of want of articles of
luxury. No matter how good the wheat crop may have been, if the weather
afterwards interferes with its harvesting, the price of wheat, in
countries in which the spirit of speculation is on the alert, will
certainly rise, because the prospect of the future crop then becomes
somewhat doubtful.(623)



                               Section CIV.


Influence Of Purchaser's Solvability On Prices.


The purchaser, besides the value in use of the goods he desires to buy,
considers his own solvability (_Zahlungsfähigkeit_ = ability to pay). It
is only solvent demand which can influence prices.(624) For instance,
among a people made up almost entirely of proletarians, there will be a
great many cases of starvation and death after a bad harvest, but the
price of corn will undergo only a slight increase.(625) But where the
greater number of inhabitants own property, and where the wealthy come to
the help of the poorer classes by means of poor-rates and acts of
benevolence, it is scarcely possible to assign limits to the increase of
the price of corn. By a necessary connection, when indispensable articles
grow dear, the demand for articles that can be dispensed with generally
decreases, and _vice versa_.(626) Every merchant, engaged in an extensive
business, is interested in knowing in advance the results of the corn
crop. The higher the price of a commodity rises, the narrower, of course,
grows the circle of those who can pay for it.(627)(628)



                               Section CV.


Supply.


In the case of isolated chance exchanges, the seller, too, takes into
consideration, first of all, value in use, and compares the satisfaction
which the commodity to be parted with and that to be received are able to
afford. It is true that in making this estimate, he is subject in the
highest degree to error and deception.(629) In the well ordered trade of a
nation whose economy is highly developed, the seller, who had this very
trade in view in his production, is wont to consider almost exclusively
the value in exchange of his commodity.



                               Section CVI.


The Cost Of Production.


As no one is willing to lose anything, every seller will consider what his
goods have cost him, and the cost of producing or procuring them as the
minimum price to be asked for them.(630) At the same time, the idea
covered by the expression cost of production, although it always embraces
whatever disappears from the resources of the producer to enter into
production, varies very much according as it is considered from the point
of view of the individual's, the nation's or the world's economy.

An individual who pays taxes to his government, and who has rented land
and employed labor and capital to engage in production, must indeed,
besides the capital he has used in such production, call all his outlay in
interest, wages, rent, and taxes, by the name of cost of production;(631)
since, unless they all come back to him in the price of the commodity, the
entire enterprise can only injure him.(632) He will, of course, add an
equitable profit to remunerate him for his enterprise, since without such
profit, he would not be able to live or produce; or else, he would be
compelled to consume his capital. The moment the current rates of
taxation, interest, wages and rent change in a country, the cost of
production is also changed in the case of the individual engaged in
production, however unaltered the technic process may remain.(633) But
taking the nation, or all mankind into consideration, we must not lose
sight of the fact that these three great sources of income, as well as
taxation, are not, rightly speaking, sources from which income flows, but
rather channels through which the aggregate income of the nation or the
world is distributed among individuals.(634) Hence the wages of labor, for
instance, which afford the means of living to the greater part of the
population, cannot possibly be looked upon simply as a factor in economic
production. The people considered in their entirety have the soil gratis.
All saving made from rent, interest on capital, or wages, is nothing but a
change of the proportion in which the results of production were
distributed hitherto among coöperators in production. Such a change may be
either advantageous or the reverse; but it is not a diminution of the
amount of sacrifice which the people in general must make for purposes of
production. Hence, in a politico-economical sense, to the cost of
production, belongs only the capital necessarily expended in production,
and which has disappeared as a part of the nation's resources, abstraction
made of the personal sacrifices in behalf of production.(635) The value of
the circulating capital which in the process is entirely used up, must, of
course, be entirely restored in the price, that of the fixed capital used
only to the extent that it has been used.(636)

The risk, which the producer runs until the commodity produced is actually
consumed must also be borne in mind.(637) There are things which are a
real risk in small enterprises that by the intervention of an insurance
company, or where the enterprises are large and insure themselves, become
a more or less variable portion of the cost of production. The price of
the product, in the latter instance, rises, by this means, very regularly.
In the former case, the rise depends partly on the feeling of the people
whether their pleasure in gain is greater than their grief over a
corresponding loss.(638)

Those enterprises which necessarily produce different products at the same
time deserve special consideration.(639) Here we may speak of "_united_
costs of production," and all that is needed is that the aggregate of
these costs should be covered by the aggregate price of both products.
This complicates to a certain extent the calculations which the seller
must make to determine his minimum demand for each product. To ascertain
this, he must subtract from the united costs of production the amount of
value which he expects with certainty for the other product.(640)



                              Section CVII.


Equilibrium Of Prices.


Goods whose cost of reproduction,(641) that is, the highest necessary cost
of reproduction is the same, have uniformly the same value in exchange.
Every deviation from this level immediately sets forces in motion which
endeavor to restore the level, just as the water of the sea seeks its
level, notwithstanding the mountains and abysses which the winds bring
forth from its bosom.(642)(643)



                              Section CVIII.


Effect Of A Rise Of Price Much Above Cost.


If the market price rises high above the cost of production, producers
make a profit greater than the average profit made in the country. This
induces them, by the appropriation of new land and the employment of new
labor and capital, to increase their business. Other parties also engage
in this profitable department of trade. This competition not only makes
the means of production dearer, but must eventually, by increasing the
demand, reduce the price of the product to the ordinary level of profit,
that is to an equilibrium with other commodities.(644) Hence, in the
beginning, every diminution of the cost of production(645) turns to the
advantage of the producer; but afterwards and permanently to that of the
consumers: an economic law exceedingly beneficent in its operations, and
not unlike the action of positive legislation in the matter of patents.
There is no greater stimulus to the making of improvements than the
certainty of reward to the person who first introduces one. The moment,
however, that the improvement is imitated by all producers, the advantage
gained by it becomes the common good of the whole nation.(646) These are,
as J. B. Say says, conquests made over the gratuitous productive force of
nature. As a consequence, the value in use of a people's resources
increases; generally, also, their value in exchange, in so far as the
production of the now cheaper goods increases in a degree greater than
their cost of production has diminished.(647)

As to the alternative so frequently discussed, whether it is preferable to
make a large percentage of profit on the sale of a small quantity of
goods, or a small percentage on a large quantity, we find that, in the
lower stages of civilization, the former is preferred, and the latter in
the higher.(648) And, indeed, the latter is not only more humane, but, in
the long run, it is more profitable to the person who adopts it as his
rule in business. In the case of commodities, he now runs but little risk
from a change of fashion, because the fashions of the masses change much
less rapidly than those of the upper circles of society. In the case of
indispensable goods, on the other hand, he may now calculate with more
certainty on the increase of population, and, therefore, on a future
market for his wares. Competition, which in former times, devoted all its
efforts to bringing about the exclusion, by law, of all rivals, is now
engaged, principally, in devising means of surpassing them by superiority
of workmanship, and in thus increasing the power of the real sources of a
nation's wealth.



                               Section CIX.


Effect Of A Decline Of Price Below Cost.


If the market price sinks below the cost of production, the producer
naturally suffers a loss, and diminishes his stock as soon as possible.
That whole establishments engaged in industry should forsake a branch of
it which is suffering from depression and enter a flourishing one, must
ever remain a rare exception.(649) But the discouraged manufacturer may
delay renewing his stock on hand,(650) replacing his machinery by new
machinery; he may dismiss some of his workmen and diminish the number of
days during which the others shall work. Moreover, most industries are
operated by means of borrowed capital, capital which must therefore, be
returned to the lender. Under certain circumstances, however, the industry
may be continued for some time, even at a real loss,(651) so long as the
loss of interest etc., which would follow the entire suspension of the
work, exceeds the loss produced by the lowering of price, but hardly any
longer. If the supply of the commodity the price of which has fallen has
been diminished, the subsequent result depends on the causes which, in the
first place, brought about the fall in price. If the diminution in price
was caused solely by a too great supply, when this superabundant supply is
gotten rid of, the price will rise again.(652) If it were produced by a
decrease in the value in use of the commodity, the diminution of the
supply can restore the former state of things only in so far as at least a
part of the purchasers ascribe to the commodity the same value in use as
before.(653) Lastly, if the lowering of the price came from a decrease in
the number of buyers, or from a decrease in their ability to purchase, the
former price will be restored when production has been adapted to a
correspondingly smaller circle of consumers.(654) This last is true
especially when the price, without having suffered any absolute change,
has become relatively too low, on account of an increase in the cost of
production.(655)



                               Chapter CX.


Different Cost Of Production Of The Same Goods.


Most goods are produced at the same time, but under different
circumstances, at a very different cost. In order to estimate the
influence of this fact upon price, we must distinguish between those
commodities the cheapest manner of the production of which may be extended
at pleasure, and those in the production of which it is necessary, in
order to satisfy the aggregate want of them, to call in the dearest mode
of production to aid the cheapest.

In the former instance, the price of commodities is naturally regulated by
the least cost of production. The person who is unable to sustain this
competition permanently, would do a great deal better to abandon the
industry altogether; for it is not in his power to raise the price by
diminishing the supply; more powerful rivals would then only need to
correspondingly increase theirs.(656)

If the same law were applicable, in the latter case, producers placed in a
less favorable situation would be compelled to immediately abandon the
market. The market, in consequence, would no longer be able to provide for
the aggregate need; and the price of the commodity would continue to rise
until the producers who had been driven from the market returned to it
again. Hence, here, price in the long run is determined by the cost of the
production of the commodity, produced under the least advantageous
conditions, while such production is necessary in order to satisfy the
aggregate need. The person engaged in production under more advantageous
conditions receives in the same price of the goods, which are cheaper to
him, an excess of profit; one which is greater in proportion as his
situation, _vis-a-vis_ of production, is superior to that of his less
favored competitors.(657)(658)



                               Section CXI.


Different Cost Of Production Of The Same Goods. (Continued.)


Hence the price of a commodity and the ratio between its supply and demand
mutually condition each other. On the height of the price depends, in
great part, how many purchasers shall resolve to make an effectual demand;
but, at the same time, to what amount of cost of production, sellers shall
extend their supply.(659) We can speak of an equilibrium between supply
and demand only when the former corresponds with the _wish_ of those who
are ready to make good the full cost of production. (_Malthus._) It has
been asked, indeed, whether it were more natural and better that demand
should precede supply or supply demand.(660) But the inquiry is an
illogical one, when expressed in so general a manner, since supply and
demand are only two sides of the same transaction. But, we may say that in
the case of indispensable goods, the want of them (demand) is always felt
sooner than the excess of them (supply), and that in the case of goods
which may be dispensed with, including, originally, money, the reverse is
true. Besides, a person engaging in the production of any kind of goods,
can, as a rule, only seldom directly investigate the relation between
supply and demand. Generally, he can do no more than compare the market
price of the commodity with the cost at which he can produce it. Many
mistakes are inevitable here; but the making of them is the necessary
sacrifice which must be endured to purchase the more than counterbalancing
advantages of free competition.(661)



                              Section CXII.


Exceptions.


The rule that goods which have the same cost of production have also equal
value in exchange, is applicable only to the extent that it is possible to
transfer the factors of production at will from one branch of production
to another. Where this really free competition does not exist, the price
depends entirely on the quantity of the supply, compared with the
solvability or capacity to pay of the purchaser; and hence, it may
sometimes rise far above the cost of production (monopoly-price), and
sometimes sink far below it (forced price, or under-price).(662) Such
hindrances to competition depend, in part, upon natural causes. Thus, in
the case of the works of art of a deceased artist, which cannot be
increased in number;(663) or in that of living celebrities who cannot
extend their mental activity in the same degree that their reputation has
grown. So, also, in the case of precious stones, which are sometimes found
free, and therefore cost nothing, but which, at the same time, have a high
price.(664) Many valuable agricultural products are, together with their
production, limited to a definite and sometimes very small district.(665)
It is to be regarded as a modification of such natural monopolies when
substitutes for a kind of goods which diminish, at least in part, the
demand for them, are found, at a cheaper price; for instance, ordinary
table-wines in the stead of fine wines. The rule applies much more
strictly to those goods which, on account of their greater quantity, can
replace inferior ones,(666) than it does to those where this is not
possible.

The principal cause of forced or under-prices (_Schleuderpreise_) is the
facility with which the product deteriorates, and must, therefore, find a
quick sale, especially when its storage or transportation is attended by
further difficulties.(667) But, very durable commodities are also subject
to under-prices, and especially those which last longest, because the
supply of them can be diminished only very slowly. Thus, for instance,
houses, in a declining city. Distress-prices are found most usually in the
case of such commodities as are produced without any intention to produce
them, as for instance, rags and excrementitious substances. The more the
mere forces of nature preponderate in production, the less can the supply
be increased or decreased at pleasure, the more frequently, as a
consequence, do we find monopoly-prices and under-prices. (Compare § 131
ff.) Thus the production of wheat is invariably connected with the order
of the seasons. Between seed-time and harvest, there are a number of
months which neither capital nor skill can shorten to any extent. The
cultivation of land, to be very much greater and more lasting, supposes so
many conditions precedent, increase of live stock, buildings etc., that it
can be attained only after a series of years. Hence it happens that wheat,
much more than manufactured products, is subject to oppressively high
prices and oppressively low ones, during a long period of time. No matter
what the influence of the forces operating in the opposite direction may
be, the price of wheat depends most largely on the result of the last
crop.(668)



                              Section CXIII.


Exceptions. (Continued.)


Other impediments in the way of freedom of competition have their origin
in social conditions. The rule governing prices applies only where the
vendor and purchaser are equally ready to exchange. But in every case in
which the producer carries on his business, not for the sake of free gain,
but simply to obtain a means of livelihood, it may be subject to many
important exceptions.(669) The richer a seller is, the longer can he wait
for a favorable opportunity to sell. Thus, for instance, wheat is somewhat
lower in price at times when payments are universally made than at other
seasons of the year, because a great many country people are then
compelled to sell. Where the country population are universally needy, it
sinks after a harvest to an unusually low figure, and in spring rises
again very high.

Sometimes price is affected by the agreements of the purchaser or seller,
but most readily by those of middlemen between consumer and producer.(670)
Customs peculiar to whole classes may exert the same influence, and such
customs are especially powerful in the lower stages of business and
industrial development. They, even at the present time, take the place,
frequently, of freedom of competition in retail business, in the book
business, and in the determination of lawyers' and doctors' fees, as well
as in the distribution of a nation's income among the three great branches
of its general economy,(671) deciding, instead of competition, how much
shall go to each. Wherever there are guilds, communities, castes etc. with
legal privileges; wherever there are difficulties placed in the way of
exportation and importation; wherever preëmption rights or
monopolies,(672) in the strict sense of the word, exist, the leveling ebb
and flow of the elements of production may be still more seriously
interfered with. Legislation(673) of this sort injures the non-privileged
portion of the population more than it helps the privileged portion. (See
§ 97.)(674)

The word _usury_, so arbitrarily used in every-day language, should be
admitted in science only to designate a famine-price, fraudulently and
intentionally caused or intensified.



                              Section CXIV.


Prices Fixed By Government.


No power can, of course, fix the price of a commodity in the long run,
which cannot at the same time fix the relation of supply and demand.
Hence, set prices fixed by governmental authority can be made to play a
part in practice only in so far as they do not establish a price in
opposition to the real state of things, only to the extent that they give
undoubted expression to it in a manner in harmony with natural conditions.
With this restriction, set or fixed prices may, in the absence of real
competition, which can always best determine prices, be useful to both
parties; otherwise one party would at one time, and the other at another,
profit by an unjust advantage; but it would not be long before both would
suffer from the perturbation caused thereby in all commercial
transactions. How pleasant it is for a traveler in Switzerland, or even in
Italy, to find set prices established there.(675) Especially where
competition is prevented by state privileges, the establishment of set
prices by the state for the protection of the public may be
necessary.(676) It is more difficult to fix a set price for a commodity in
proportion to its complexity and to its variableness in quality; and where
there are different grades of quality of the same commodity, and the
transition from one grade to another is almost imperceptible, such price
is easily evaded.(677) In the case of every enterprise carried on by many
in common, where no competition is possible, it is necessary to supply the
defect by means similar to the establishment of fixed prices; as in the
case of government, by fees for governmental services, and the coöperation
of a chamber of deputies in the imposition of taxes and the determination
of official salaries etc.(678)



                               Section CXV.


Influence Of Growing Civilization On Prices.


On the whole, prices become more and more regular as national-economic
civilization advances. Progress in civilization tends to bring the parties
engaged in the struggle for prices that is buyers and sellers, nearer to
one another, in so far as it uniformly decreases the cost of production,
and increases the purchaser's ability to pay.(679) (See § 101.) The more
universal division of labor makes commercial intercourse more necessary to
every one, at the same time that it makes it more of a habit to him; and
hence exchange ceases more and more to be a matter of caprice or chance.
The better means of transportation and communication render it easier, in
every way, for supply and demand to meet. With the advance of general
enlightenment and education, an acquaintance with commodities also becomes
more general, and every purchaser is on a better way to be able to
estimate the cost of production which the seller has to bear. Hence,
fraudulent prices and prices founded in error become less frequent; and
all this is helped forward by the greater accuracy of weights and
measures. The increase of population makes competition more active in all
branches of trade, while at the same time, with the greater freedom of
circulation, a number of causes which previously operated to produce very
high prices in one place and very low ones in another are removed.(680)
But especially, the growth of a distinct class of merchants leads to a
uniformity in price. This class are incited by their own interest to
purchase at low prices and sell at high prices. Thus, their competition in
the former case raises prices, and lowers them in the latter.(681) In all
lower stages of civilization, the custom of making offers and beating down
in price plays a great part, while where culture is higher, the system of
fixed prices (but not by government) gains ground continually. Here
Turgot's principle is applicable, viz.: that the current price of an
article is tacitly understood when one asks a merchant the price of his
wares.(682)

This proposition is true in the case of individuals, as well as of classes
and of whole nations.(683) It is plain, that under a system of fixed
prices we can more certainly discover what the equitable price is, than in
the heat of higgling which besides consumes a great deal of precious time.
Lastly, one of the principal requisites of a well developed scale of
prices is national honor, and this, doubtless, increases in the higher
stages of civilization, not only because of the greater moral culture
which then prevails, but also and especially because that which
constitutes a people's real and best interests is better understood.(684)
Among declining nations, many of these developments take a retrogressive
road. The very great distinction between rich and poor, between educated
and uneducated, again produces great fluctuations in price. A proletarian
people who have sunk so low as to live on potatoes will suffer much more
from variations in price and of the means of subsistence than a people who
live on wheat; for the reason that it is so difficult to export or to
preserve(685) potatoes. Nor can it be doubted, that the greatest possible
constancy of prices is the most beneficial condition that the general
economy of a people can be in. Where prices change while the cost of
production remains the same, one person can only gain what the other has
lost. But such unmerited gains and undeserved losses have an invariable
tendency to destroy the deepest roots of a people's economic activity; and
intentional speculation based upon such change usually assumes an immoral
character. (Stock-jobbing.)(686) Even if Macleod be right, that an
increase or decrease in prices is to be regarded as a warning of excess,
the former of excess of consumption, the latter of production, no one will
doubt that it is the interest of every organism to confine pain within the
smallest possible limits, even if its consequences are so beneficial to
the preservation of the whole body.




                               Chapter III.


Money In General.



                              Section CXVI.


Instrument Of Exchange. Measure Of Value. Barter.


Wherever the division of labor is very highly developed, the continuance
of barter, or the direct exchange of one object of consumption for
another, presents difficulties well nigh insurmountable. How difficult it
would be always to find the person who could supply us with precisely what
we wanted, and at the same time have need of what we had a surplus
of.(687) But how much less frequently would it happen that one's want and
another's surplus would correspond exactly the one to the other in
quantity; that, for instance, the manufacturer of nails, desirous of
exchanging his nails for a cow, should meet a cattle-dealer who should
want exactly as many nails as a cow is worth! Here there is one chief
difficulty in the way, viz.: that there are so many commodities which
cannot be divided without causing a diminution or even a destruction of
their value; and that others cannot be stored away in any quantity without
becoming a very heavy burthen to their owner. How useful it would
therefore be, if there was one commodity which should be acceptable to
every person, at all times, especially if in addition to this, it
possessed the qualities of durability, capacity for transportation and for
being stored up and preserved. Any person who possessed a proper supply of
this one commodity would then be certain of being able to obtain all other
exchangeable commodities through its instrumentality; and every seller
would be satisfied to exchange what he had to dispose of against this
"universal commodity." If two values are equal to a third, they are equal
to each other. It is, therefore, a simple matter to use this most current
of all commodities, with which all others are most frequently compared, as
a measure of the relative values of all other exchangeable commodities.
There is need of such a measure, and it is analogous to the want
experienced by the mathematician who has a column of fractions to sum up,
and who does it by first reducing them all to a common denominator.
(_Storch._)(688) A person entrusted with the duty of assessing the values
of two hundred different articles would be obliged, if he had no such
measure to use, to burthen his memory with at least 19,900(689) different
ratios. With it, he need carry only 199 in his head.

Such a commodity, universally in favor, and which, on that account, is
employed as an intermediary in the effecting of exchanges of the most
varied nature, in the measuring of all exchange-values and as a
value-carrier (_Werthträger_) in time(690)(691) and space, we call money.
(_Merce universale: Berri; produit préféré: Ganilh; marchandise
intermédiare; Bastiat._)(692)

The more enlightened portions of every business community gradually come
to require payment in the commodity which has for the time being the
greatest circulating capacity. If to this be added the sanction of the
government, and if the government itself recognizes this same "universal
commodity" as the means of payment of all debts, or as "legal tender"
(_puissance libératoire_), where no other is expressly agreed upon, the
"universal commodity" in question then becomes money in the fullest sense
of the idea conveyed by the word.(693)



                              Section CXVII.


Effect Of The Introduction Of Money.


By the introduction of money, most exchanges are divided into two halves:
purchase and sale.(694) We may also say with Schlözer, that by its means,
exchange, for the first time, becomes a sale, and obscure value in
exchange, clear and definite price. (_Permatio vicina emtioni_). Were
there no money, the party to an exchange, occupying the most advantageous
economic position, would possess a much greater superiority over the other
than he does now. Many a bread-buyer, especially, would be half starved
before he could agree with the seller on the quantity of bread to be
received in exchange for the commodity he had to dispose of. The producer
of the means of subsistence would here possess an extreme advantage, since
the urgent necessity of the exchange for the one party, and the power of
the other to postpone it, would make the determination of the price an
entirely arbitrary matter.(695) Hence, the development of money as the
instrument of trade, keeps pace with the development of individual
liberty. Payment of wages in money makes the workman more responsible for
his husbandry etc., but at the same time, freer, than payment in produce.
Now, also, a higher division of labor becomes possible; for the easier it
is to obtain everything else for money, the easier it is for each person
to devote himself exclusively to one branch of business.(696) Without
money, too, only ready commodities could be exchanged one against another.
Only when money has become the instrument of trade, is it possible to
separate the net from the gross returns, and, therefore, to manage income
properly. (_Schäffle_). Now, also, it becomes for the first time really
remunerative to produce more than one needs for his own use, and to save.
Without money, the owner of any one kind of capital, who could not employ
it himself, would be obliged, if he desired to loan it, to find not only a
person who was in need of capital, but one who needed the very kind of
capital he had. For instance, the person who had one horse too many, would
be obliged to look for another who was in need of one etc. And how
difficult a task it would be to determine the amount of interest, if it
had to be paid in produce or kind, and even to make a return in produce or
kind of capital which had been presumably used. (_Storch_). Moveable
property or resources can attain importance only after the introduction of
good money, since, previous to such introduction, it was by reason of its
great variety,(697) and of its perishable nature, immensely inferior to
landed property. Hence it is, that money, in a nation's economy, is what
the blood is in the life of the animal. It is, so to speak, the common
reservoir in which all food is first dissolved, and by which, at a later
stage, the elements of nutrition and preservation are distributed to the
several organs.(698) There is, indeed, no machine which has saved as much
labor as money. (_Lauderdale_). It is true that the shadows which wealth
is wont to cast, extravagance, avarice and inequality of every kind, may
readily grow longer and darker in consequence of the introduction of
money.(699) But may not the knife which, in the hands of the surgeon, does
so much for life, become an instrument of danger in the hands of a child?
The invention of money has been rightly compared to the invention of
writing with letters.(700) We may, however, call the introduction of money
as the universal medium of exchange (money-economy),(701) in which goods
intended for use are exchanged against money(702)--instead of barter
(barter economy), which is a system of public economy (_Schäffle_), in an,
as yet, very little developed form, man being there less sociable with his
fellow men--one of the greatest and most beneficent advances ever made by
the race.(703)



                             Section CXVIII.


The Different Kinds Of Money.


Very different kinds of commodities have, according to circumstances, been
used as money; but uniformly only such as possess a universally recognized
economic value.(704) On the whole, people in a low stage of civilization
are wont to employ, mainly, only ordinary commodities, such as are
calculated to satisfy a vulgar and urgent want, as an instrument of
exchange. As they advance in civilization, they, at each step, choose a
more and more costly object, for this purpose,(705) and one which
ministers to the more elevated wants.

A. Races of hunters, at least in non-tropical countries, usually use skins
as money; that is the almost exclusive product of their labor, one which
can be preserved for a long period of time, which constitutes their
principal article of clothing and their principal export in the more
highly developed regions.(706)

B. Nomadic races and the lower agricultural races,(707) pass, by a natural
gradation, to the use of cattle as money; which supposes rich pasturages
at the disposal of all. If it were otherwise, there would be a great many
to whom payments of this kind had been made, who would not know what to do
with the cattle given them, on account of the charges for their
maintenance.(708)



                              Section CXIX.


The Metals As Money.


C. That metals were used for the purpose of money much later than the
commodities above mentioned, and the precious metals in turn later than
the non-precious metals, cannot by any means be shown to be universally
true. Rather is gold in some countries to be obtained by the exercise of
so little skill, and both gold and silver satisfy a want(709) so live and
general, and one so early felt, that they are to be met with as an
instrument of exchange in very early times.(710) In the case of isolated
races, much depends on the nature of the metals with which the geologic
constitution of the country has furnished them.(711) In general, however,
the above law is found to prevail here. The higher the development of a
people becomes, the more frequent is the occurrence of large payments; and
to effect these, the more costly a metal is, the better, of course, it is
adapted to effect such payments. Besides, only rich nations are able to
possess the costly metals in a quantity absolutely great.(712) Among the
Jews, gold as money, dates only from the time of David.(713) King Pheidon,
of Argos, it is said, introduced silver money into Greece, about the
middle of the eighth century before Christ. Gold came into use at a much
later period.(714) The Romans struck silver money, for the first time, in
209 before Christ, and, in 207, the first gold coins.(715) Among modern
nations, Venice (1285) and Florence seem to have been the first to have
coined gold in any quantity.(716) Henry III. of England (ob. 1272), was
the first to coin gold, but with so little success, that for a long time
after, Edward III. (ob. 1377) was regarded as the first English monarch
who had coined gold.(717) How little a barbarous people are in a condition
to make use of very costly material as money, is proved by the account
which Tacitus gives of the ancient Germans, who preferred silver to gold
in trade.(718) England presents us with an instance of the other extreme.
Since 1816, silver, in that country, has been used only as a species of
change, and the circulation of gold governs in almost all commercial
transactions.(719)

D. The local usage of some countries has raised many other commodities to
the dignity of instruments of exchange, especially where the population
are poor and the metals which might be used as money have not existed in
sufficient quantities or in the requisite proportion. But people have
always limited themselves in the material of their money to such
commodities as are universally acceptable, as uniform as may be, and
current as articles of export or import.(720)



                               Section CXX.


Money--The Precious Metals.


That the precious metals are uniformly preferred in highly cultivated
nations(721) as the instrument of exchange, depends on the greatness and
uniformity of their value in exchange, but especially on their durability
and pliancy as to form.

This value in exchange is great, because their beauty, which consists in
their luster and their sonorous ring,(722) gives them great value in use;
and because, at the same time, their rarity in nature makes the supply of
them relatively small,(723) and not susceptible of increase at
pleasure.(724) As they contain so large a value in so small a volume, they
are adapted to transportation from one place to another, with but little
difficulty--a matter of the greatest importance in an instrument of
exchange.(725) Hence, it is much easier to keep the demand for them and
the supply of them at a level all over the world, than it is the demand
and supply of most other commodities. And this all the more as there are
not different kinds of gold and silver, but only different qualities of
their fineness.(726) It also contributes to the uniformity of their value
in exchange, that they minister mainly only to wants of luxury. The most
indispensable commodities are subject to the greatest variations in price
(see § 103), whereas, in the case of the precious metals, the diversity of
uses to which they may be turned contributes greatly to render their
value, as instruments of exchange, more equable. If the supply of them be
small, gold and silver vessels are less in demand; a part of the old ones
are melted down, and _vice versa_.

In durability, the precious metals surpass almost all other commodities.
They are not at all affected by air or water, and they can be corroded
only by very few fluids. Fire may, indeed, change their form, but scarcely
in any degree the value of the material of gold, and that of silver very
little, and then only when it is subjected to a very powerful blast or
draught of air.(727)(728) Hence, while by laying them by, they suffer
virtually nothing at all (a most valuable article is an article to deposit
savings in), their wear and tear from use may be very much decreased by an
admixture with other metals in the proper proportion.(729) This durability
contributes largely to keep the price of the precious metals more uniform.
By the time that the wheat crop is rightly harvested, the great bulk of
the previously stored wheat is, as a rule, consumed; and, therefore, the
supply of wheat depends almost entirely on the yield of the last crop. On
the other hand, it is probable that there is many a piece of money, the
raw material of which was dug from Thracian gold mines in the time of King
Philip or from the silver mines of Spain during the reign of Hannibal, in
circulation to-day. Compared with the immeasurable stores of gold and
silver which have gone on accumulating for thousands of years, the new
yield of them, in any one year, is lost like a drop in a bucket. Hence,
only when the yield of the mines has continued for a very long time, or
when it is exceedingly great or remarkably small, can the price of their
products change to any great extent.(730) Even during the revolution in
prices, between 1492 and 1560, the yearly decline in their prices was only
one-half of one per cent. per annum.

Their great pliability of form has, too, very important advantages for our
purpose: first, that they can be divided very accurately into very small
parts, and that the volume of every part corresponds exactly to the value
of the part;(731) and secondly, that they take an impression at very
little cost, an impression which is an authoritative and trustworthy
expression of their weight and quality, thus saving the commercial public
the perilous trouble of weighing and testing them every time they are
used.(732)(733)(734) This duty the state, as a rule, assumes. (Coinage.)
When its authority, however, is not recognized, as is generally the case
in international trade, gold and silver bars are even now used, and have,
therefore, to be weighed and tested.(735)(736)



                              Section CXXI.


Value In Use And Value In Exchange Of Money.


The original value in use of the precious metals, to satisfy certain wants
of luxury in the most aesthetic and the most substantial manner, continues
still; but with the advance of civilization, the employment of gold and
silver for this purpose has fallen farther and farther behind the more
recent employment of these metals as the best material for money. And
since now the services rendered by money may be divided into two classes:
storing up or preservation, and the transmission (division, concentration)
of values,(737) the former always plays a greater part in the earlier
states of the development of trade by money; and the latter plays the
larger part in the later stages of the same development. We may best
compare money to the other machines or instruments of commerce.(738)

The person who, in times when there is a dearth of goods, and especially
of capital, complains of a want of money, commits the same error as if he
ascribed a scarcity or absence of grain, when it exists, to a too small
number of wagons to carry it, or to the narrowness of country highways.
The inference may, indeed, be sometimes well-founded, but certainly only
by way of exception; and yet it is generally the first which
politico-economical quacks think of in practice.(739) Like all tools or
instruments, money constitutes a part of an individual's or a nation's, or
of the world's capital. Considered from the point of view of private
business or economy, money is circulating capital, but from the point of
view of the world's economy, it is fixed capital.(740)



                              Section CXXII.


Value In Exchange Of Money.


The value in exchange of money is said to be high when all other
commodities estimated in money are cheap; and low in the opposite case. We
have here to do with the application of the most general of all laws of
price; therefore, with the demand and supply of money. The demand for it
depends on the wants and the means of payment of its purchasers.
Therefore, if a country has little trade, it will, on this account, need
only few instruments of trade, that is, of little money to effect
exchanges. If it be poor in other goods, it will get little money in
exchange. In the former respect, there is a beneficent principle of
equalization or compensation which decreases the price-variations of
money, no matter of what kind, in the necessity, when the number of
business transactions remains the same and money becomes cheaper, to use
more of it, and less when it becomes dearer.(741) The supply of money is,
in the long run, dependent chiefly on the cost of production. But since
the cost of production in different mines is very different, the value in
exchange of the precious metals is determined by the cost of producing
them from the poorest mines which must be worked in order to supply the
aggregate want of them. (See § 110.)(742) The more unfavorable the
conditions of their production are, the greater is the quantity of
commodities which must be given for a pound of gold, silver etc.; that
producers may not be deterred from the prosecution of their work. The
extremes of the value in exchange of money are dependent on the use for
which it is intended. That value cannot rise higher than to the point at
which single pieces of money become inconvenient on account of their
smallness, nor sink lower than the point at which a similar inconvenience
is produced by their too great size. In both instances, it would become
necessary to have recourse to other instruments of exchange.



                             Section CXXIII.


The Quantity Of Money A Nation Needs.


How great the amount of money needed in the entire economy of any state
is, cannot be always rightly determined, either by the amount of the
national resources, or by the number of the population.(743) It is a very
easy thing to refute the opinion, that the aggregate amount of cash money
in a country constitutes an equivalent of the aggregate amount of all
other commodities to be found there at any time, in such a way that the
two pans of this great scales (_Locke_) hang always in a state of
equilibrium, and that an increase of the amount of money, the amount of
all other commodities remaining the same, must be productive of an exactly
corresponding decrease in the value of each piece of money.(744) Think
only of the great many commodities which are obtained and consumed without
any exchange whatever! Rather does the amount of money necessary to keep
the value in exchange of the money employed in a people's public economy
unaltered,(745) depend on the cooperation of the following conditions:

A. _The number and extent of such commercial transactions as are effected
by means of money_;(746) a relation which, evidently, increases (see § 56,
ff.) with every advance in the division of labor. Hence the transition
from serfdom and socage service to free labor, from domestic-servant labor
to day-labor and piece-work, from feudal military service to that of paid
and standing armies, from land-privileges and allowances in produce, such
as fire-bote etc., to the payment of officials in money, from dues in
produce to taxes in money, and regular lease-hold interests, from
requisitions to loans of money; in a word, from the barter-economy
(_Naturalwirthschaft_) of the middle ages to the trade by means of money
in the higher stages of civilization, that is, from the "feudal" to the
"commercial" system must, of itself, increase the money-need
(_Geldbedarf_) of a people.

B. _The rapidity of the circulation of money_; because, in most commercial
transactions, one dollar which circulates ten times a year really performs
the same service as ten dollars which go from hand to hand once in a year;
just as the economic use of a ship employed in the transportation of
commodities does not depend on its commodiousness alone but on its
rapidity also.(747) The economic use of money does not depend on its
amount simply. Says _Sismondi_: "The amount of the medium of circulation
in a state must be equal to the sum of the payments made in it in a given
time, divided by the sum of the times the former has, on an average,
changed owners within that time."(748) Under given economic circumstances,
the rapidity of the medium of circulation is, taken all in all, not by any
means an arbitrary matter. It will happen very seldom that one man will
purchase or consume a commodity in order that another may not want
money.(749) Were the greater number of money-earners (and in nations with
a healthy economic life this number is always made up of men noted for the
good management of their own affairs) inclined to pay out the money which
they had taken in, rapidly, a very active production would prevail
everywhere; and this, in turn, supposes general commercial freedom and
great legal security. The less these conditions are developed, the more
difficult it becomes, not only to lay out the money received to-day
productively to-morrow, but the more imperatively does a proper foresight
demand, that a reserve-fund should be maintained for times of necessity.
(See § 43.)(750) Even in the same age and among the same people, money
moves most slowly under the influences of troublesome and critical epochs;
for the dangers of war and sedition, of impending burdensome taxation,
commercial gluts and numerous cases of bankruptcy uniformly operate to
make the possessors of money hold anxiously to their present supply.(751)

In less civilized countries, the same condition of things leads the people
even to bury their money-treasures. In large cities, the circulation of
money is generally more rapid than in the country districts; in a thickly
populated than in a thinly populated country; and in trade than in
agriculture.(752) Every improvement in the means of intercommunication
tends to facilitate it. The rich man possesses, as a rule, less money,
relatively speaking, than the poorer man. Hence, a more equable division
of a nation's resources among the people would increase the amount of
money needed.(753) While the concentration, as to time, of circulation
into few great terms of payment is calculated of itself to cause a large
sum of money to remain idle in the interval,(754) its concentration in
space in large commercial cities must dispense with the necessity of a
great number of instruments of exchange. In England, it is customary for
every man in comfortable circumstances, as soon as he receives any money,
to deposit with a banker, and to make all his payments by means of checks
upon the latter. Cash money is now employed by Londoners only in payment
of wages, and in trade between retail dealers and consumers. The banker is
there the common cashier of a great number of private individuals, and is
in a condition to make their payments for them with a much smaller amount
of money, especially when they are to be made by one of his depositors to
another.(755) This "union of money-chests" (_Kassenvereinigung_) has been
effected also on a larger scale; inasmuch as bankers, in greater or
smaller numbers, are wont to have one bank as a center; and the country
banks, in turn, to be in constant relation with the great moneyed
institutions of London, subject to a species of general superintendence by
the Bank of England. These great monetary institutions have, so to speak,
a common rendezvous at the Clearing-House, where the greater part of their
payments are made by a mere off-setting of debits and credits;(756) and
this bank is, as it were, the cashier-in-chief of the nation, and in
possession of almost the entire cash stores of the English people.(757)

C. _The quantity and rapidity of circulation of the representatives of
money._ These, in so far as they are worthy of the name here given them,
depend on the credit of those who issue them; that is, on the certainty
that they shall, at the time fixed, be redeemed in money. To this category
belong the paper money of the state which bears no interest, and the
treasury-notes of the state which do bear interest, bank notes, bills of
exchange, promissory notes, book-credits of private persons, sometimes
even certificates of the storage of goods in public stores. It is
estimated, that, at the present time, nine-tenths of all the payments made
in Great Britain are effected without the aid of money, or even of
bank-notes.(758) The capacity of a person to make purchases does not
depend simply on the amount of money he possesses, but on his credit
likewise. The person who buys on credit, contributes as much to raise the
price of commodities as the person who buys for cash; with this exception,
however, that when the former eventually fails to redeem his promise to
pay, the price raised by him quickly falls again.(759) And, indeed, all
the various forms of credit, mentioned above, agree essentially in this,
however they may differ from one another in costliness and rapidity of
circulation.



                              Section CXXIV.


The Quantity Of Money A Nation Needs. (Continued.)


Of the three conditions above mentioned, it is evident that the first
operates on the amount of money needed, in a direction opposite to that of
the other two. The usual course of development is this: among an advancing
people, the number of money transactions increases at first; later, when
education has become general, and the people have grown habituated to the
giving and receiving of credit, the circulation of money is accelerated,
and an increase of the substitutes for money effected. Hence, it is
perfectly natural that the money-need of a people whose public economy is
only half developed, should, in proportion to the number of inhabitants,
be greater, not only than that of a people whose economy is wholly
undeveloped, but also, than that of a people whose public economy has been
carried to the highest point of perfection.(760)(761)



                              Section CXXV.


Uniformity Of The Value In Exchange Of The Precious Metals.


The peculiar properties of the precious metals described above (§ 120),
explains satisfactorily enough, why, at the same time, but in different
countries, they have more nearly the same value in exchange than any other
commodity whatever. Like a fluid in tubes which communicate with one
another, the precious metals seek the one same level of value the whole
world over.(762) Only, it must not be supposed that every absolute or
relative increase of the amount of money in a country must produce
immediately a corresponding diminution of the value of money; and in
addition to this cause an exportation of money.(763) If the number of
trade-transactions increases in the same proportion as the amount of
money, the value of money remains entirely unaffected.(764) The same thing
occurs when the increased influx of money, instead of overflowing the
channels of circulation, only swells the volume in the ready-money
reservoirs. By means of these stores of ready money, very large payments
may be made by one nation to another, without changing the circulation,
or, therefore, the value of money, in the slightest degree, on either
side.(765) If, indeed, such payments should continue for a long time to
flow in the same direction, they would certainly influence the
circulation, and then produce a current in the opposite direction.

However, it may happen, that the value of money in different countries may
be permanently different, when there are lasting difficulties in the way
of the leveling influence of the incoming or outgoing current of money.
Thus, the precious metals maintain a high value in those countries
especially which can obtain them only by giving commodities difficult of
transportation for them. If, for instance, an Englishman, anxious to take
advantage of the high value of money in Poland, should cause Polish
articles, such as wheat, wood, wool etc., to be imported into England,
they would reach their destination very much increased in price, because
of the great cost of transportation. Whether Poland or England would have
to bear this cost depends on the relations of supply and demand. Certain
it is, however, that the migration of money is hereby rendered exceedingly
difficult, forbidden even within the limits of certain value-differences,
especially where the means of communication are universally bad. And so,
the smaller the number of countries which minister to the want of
commodities of precious-metal districts, the more must other nations
obtain the money they need only at second and third hand; by means of
which, naturally, money itself is made dearer each time. Now, it is, as a
rule, nations in a low stage of civilization, that engage in the
exportation of raw material, and they are the worst adapted to engaging
directly in the carrying on of trade. When, therefore, they do not possess
gold or silver mines themselves, money-value is, as a rule, highest with
them; especially as the absence of legal security and protection, which
generally obtains there, makes the value in use of the precious metals one
of great urgency to them.(766)(767)

Direct legislative or governmental provisions may operate in the same
direction; as, for instance, the Japanese embargo laws which, not long
since, limited all foreign trade to two foreign nations.(768) I intend to
treat of the influence of taxation on the value of money, in a future work
to be written by me, on the Political Economy of the State.



                              Section CXXVI.


Uniformity Of The Value In Exchange Of The Precious Metals. (Continued.)


Most nations can satisfy their want of the precious metals, only through
the medium of foreign trade. Hence they very naturally look upon the cost
of production of the articles of export by the exchange of which they
obtain the precious metals either directly or indirectly, as the cost of
production of these metals themselves. But, the rule that all commodities
of equal cost of production have equal value in exchange is applicable
only within the limits of the same economic territory (§ 107), for it is
frequently physically impossible, and still more frequently rendered
difficult, by laws, customs and states of mind to transfer factors of
production from one country to another simply on account of the more
advantageous market they would there find. Thus, for instance, when
England exchanges its cotton and woolen goods, and steel instruments for
Mexican silver, the cost of production of the two equivalents may be very
different, and the one party in this trade may permanently make a larger
profit than the other.(769) According to § 101, that party will be most
favored in whom the desire of holding to his own commodities is farthest
from being out-weighed by his desire to obtain the other. But, at bottom,
silver is no very indispensable article. Especially in highly civilized
commercial communities, it is easiest to obtain substitutes for it, while
the principal articles of English export are, for the most part, objects
with which to satisfy wants rather urgent in their nature, very general,
and of rapid growth; and which, besides, are not, to any extent, difficult
of transportation. It is not a matter of surprise, therefore, that English
commodities, in silver countries, are generally sold above the mean price
between the English cost of production and the Mexican, for instance, or
the cost of procuring them elsewhere; and that silver, on the other hand,
is sold in England, under the same. But this lowers the price of the
precious metals of the latter country in general. Hence a change in the
channels of international trade, which in most countries is the only
source of gold and silver, may make the price of the precious metals
dearer in one place and cheaper in another, even when the conditions of
the production of mines remain entirely unaltered.(770) In an isolated
country, any amount of gold and silver whatever would, finally, as soon as
the people had grown accustomed to it, suffice for all the wants of
circulation. But, in commerce with the rest of the world, the greater
quantity and greater cheapness of the precious metals, that is of those
commodities which are most current and are possessed of the greatest
amount of economic energy, must, without fail, be of the greatest
advantage to a country; and this irrespective of the fact that they are
under certain circumstances the symptom of an especially highly developed
public economy. If we suppose two nations, A and B, equal in every other
point, but that A has twice as much money as B, and that prices are twice
as high there as in B; yet, with the same effort or sacrifice, A could
levy twice as many taxes as B. In case of a war between them, A might pay
in ready money for the necessities of an army which had invaded B, with
one-fourth the sacrifice which B would have to make to support its army in
A, if we reverse the case, and suppose that B had invaded A.(771)




                               Chapter IV.


History Of Prices.



                             Section CXXVII.


Measure Of Prices,--Constant Measure.


If we had a measure of prices with the same universality of application
and the same unchangeableness as the measure of length, which is
determined by astronomical calculation, we should be able, not only to
clearly understand all the data relating to value, that is to say, a not
unimportant portion of historical science, but we should, moreover, have a
practical means to condition and fix even perpetual annuities, in such a
way, that they would always afford the same economic and purchasing power
to the person receiving them. No wonder, therefore, that political
economists since Petty's time have zealously labored to find a _constant_
measure of prices.(772) If by this we understand a species of goods such
that it should always maintain equal exchange-power, as compared with all
other commodities, the idea of a "constant" measure of prices is
unthinkable. We would have to suppose here, that not a single kind of
goods varied in its price; since, otherwise, at least as compared with
those that varied in price, the measure of prices would itself be
variable.(773) But we may, indeed, search for a kind of goods such that
its inherent elements and the elements peculiar to it, so far as it is
itself concerned, and which go to determine price, should exert the same
uniform influence at all times. If there be such a kind of goods, and its
value in exchange as compared with other kinds of goods were to vary, we
should be certain, at least, that the cause of the change was not in it,
but in them; that _it_ had not grown dearer or cheaper, but that they had
grown cheaper or dearer. Such a kind of goods would have these two
characteristics: A. A given amount of it would, under all circumstances,
have the same value in use for the same number of persons. B. It would
require, under all circumstances, the same cost to produce it, and
therefore the supply might always keep pace exactly with the number of
those who demanded it.(774) In this way the supply and demand of this kind
of goods, abstraction made of the quantity of counter-values, would
preserve forever the same invariable relation.



                             Section CXXVIII.


Value In Exchange Estimated In Labor.


Adam Smith is of opinion that different kinds of goods, no matter how far
removed from one another they may be in time or space, have equal value in
exchange, when an equal quantum of human labor may be purchased by their
means. He adopts, because of the great differences in work, the average
work of the common manual laborer. One work-day, and the sacrifice of
"rest, freedom and happiness" therewith connected, are, under all
circumstances, attended with the same inconvenience (value). If at one
time this day's labor will exchange for more, and at another for less, of
any kind of goods, it is only because the price of the latter has fallen
or risen.(775)

But we may ask whether the same sacrifice of liberty is as great a
hardship to a Russian as to a Bedouin; or whether the sacrifice of an
equal amount of rest is as hard for the New Englander as it is for a Turk,
or as difficult to endure on a hot day in July as in the cold of winter.
Besides, we have here to do primarily only with value in exchange; and
that value in the case of day-laborers' work is subject to very great
fluctuations.

The elements on which the demand and supply of labor depend are not, in
themselves, invariable, nor do their variations usually compensate for one
another. In progressive nations, the value in use of day-laborers' work
increases as well as the capacity of their employers to pay them; but, at
the same time, as a rule, and at least relatively speaking, the supply of
labor diminishes on account of the increase in the cost of production of
workmen. Precisely the reverse of this happens in nations in their
decline, and in over-populated nations. The workman is subjected to the
necessity of accepting distress-prices for his work, and especially of
accepting them for a long space of time.(776) How often it happens that,
if only transitorily, when wages are declining, work improves, and _vice
versa_.(777)

Ricardo's school employs, as the measure of the price of various kinds of
goods, the quantity of work by which the goods themselves are
produced.(778) It is evident that the same amount of common labor produces
very different results, according as it is well or badly conducted. Hence
Ricardo must have used the word labor in the sense of labor ideally
adapted to its end. But in this way it would be impossible to reduce all
the different kinds of labor to a common denominator.(779) Nor could the
peculiar effects of capitalization, or the influence of the natural or
artificial limitations of competition be estimated in terms of such a
measure. (See §§ 47, 107, 189.)(780)



                              Section CXXIX.


The Precious Metals The Best Measure Of Prices.


It is no more possible to find a constant measure of prices than it is to
square the circle. (_J. B. Say._) If the two magnitudes to be compared are
separated from each other in space but not in time, the precious metals
constitute not only the best measure of their prices, but also a very good
one. But the precious metals are subject to very sensible and accidental
variations in price in long periods of time. If, therefore, we would
compare sums of money belonging to different times with one another, we
must first construct a price-current list of all the more important
articles of commerce for the time in question, and in the quantities they
are needed in every day life. We would next have to calculate the average
of these mean prices, and thus to determine the relative value of the
amounts to be estimated.(781) The person who should limit his comparison
to a few species of commodities, says von Mangoldt, would lose in
exactness what he gained in comprehensibility.

In every such list, the wages of a day would occupy a very important
place. The desire of exerting an influence over the lives and actions of
other men, and the desire of relatively greater social distinction as
compared with the social distinction of others, is very general; and there
is scarcely any better evidence that it has been attained than the
possession of the power of controlling a large number of days' work. The
man who can keep one thousand day laborers is certainly, in a
politico-economical sense, an important personage. Besides, the height of
day-wages has the most direct influence on the price of many other
commodities.(782)

No less important is the price of wheat, or rather of the principal
article of food of the people, for the time being, with which the price of
inland raw material--in so far as it can be produced from the same soil
alternately with wheat--and, in the long run, also the wages of labor, are
so essentially connected.(783) The same indispensable necessity of wheat
which causes its price to fluctuate so largely from year to year, and from
month to month, promotes the uniformity of its average price,(784) when
many years are taken into the account.(785)(786) (_Malthus._) If, by
reason of great progress made in the art of agriculture, the cost of the
production of wheat should fall to one-half of what it was, a large
increase of population would certainly not be delayed long. And so, on the
other hand, there would be a decrease of population if, by the destruction
of artificial means of irrigation, or other steps in the direction of a
retrogressive civilization, the cost of the production of wheat were to be
permanently increased.

But even the average price of wheat, during a long series of years, is not
entirely invariable. The increasing consumption compels the nation, as a
whole, to provide for its requirement of wheat from less fertile sources,
which increases its price generally. It is true that the progress of the
science of agriculture and of the corn-trade counteract this tendency,
retard the advance of the price of wheat, and may, for a time, produce an
opposite tendency. It is true, also, that the people are induced by their
most general and vital interests to take advantage of this possibility.
But spite of the frequency of exceptions to it, the rule remains.(787) If,
therefore, we wished to so fix a perpetual annuity that it should always
be worth as much money as a certain quantity of wheat had cost, on an
average, during the three preceding decades, the thing-value of this
annuity would, on the whole, rise with an advance in civilization.(788) To
obtain something that would remain the same, it would be necessary to
combine wheat with at least one chief commodity, the intrinsic basis of
the price of which had a development independent of the price of grain;
but the whole to be made payable in money. The precious metals are, in
many respects, so diametrically opposed in properties to wheat, in their
dispensableness, transportable character and durability, for instance,
that these two classes of commodities are best adapted to act as
counter-balances to each other.(789)



                              Section CXXX.


History Of The Prices Of The Chief Wants Of Life.


The higher civilization advances, the dearer all those commodities in the
production of which the factor nature with value in exchange predominates
are apt to become; and the cheaper, on the other hand, all those in which
labor and capital play the principal productive part.(790) This is
accounted for, not only by the almost unlimited capacity of labor and
capital to be increased, while the natural forces which have value in
exchange are susceptible of increase to so small an extent; but also, and
especially, because new additions of labor and capital are wont to cause
relatively smaller results in the production of raw material, and
relatively larger ones in industry and commerce. (§ 33, ff).(791)

Hence, from the relations the prices of the different classes of
commodities bear to one another, we may draw important conclusions as to
the degree of civilization which a country has attained. The above law
also affords an explanation of the fact, that a young nation, which has
made no great strides in the way of development, and in which, of course,
the production of raw material preponderates, draw their commercial and
manufactured necessaries, by way of preference, from precisely the most
highly civilized foreign nations. The latter are in a condition, and
accustomed, to give the largest quantity and the best quality of
manufactured articles for a required quantity of raw material; and, of
course, _vice versa_. Hence, in this intercourse of nations, the most
urgent want, and the completest and easiest possibility of satisfying it,
meet.(792) Only very highly civilized mother-countries can hold fast to
colonial possessions in our day.



                              Section CXXXI.


History Of The Prices Of The Chief Wants Of Life. (Continued.)


A. In the case of a great many raw materials, we repeatedly find the
following to be the course of development. In the lower stages of
civilization, they grow of themselves, and in such quantities that a small
amount of labor, and that only the labor of occupation, more than suffices
to satisfy the small demand for them. Here, naturally enough, the price of
raw materials is very low. After this, it rises with every advance made in
civilization, for two reasons: first, because the demand becomes greater
and greater; and then, because the naturally free sources of production,
called into requisition by other wants, now flow less and less
abundantly.(793) This rise in price continues until the point is reached
at which it becomes customary, instead of the mere occupation of the free
gifts of nature, to bring forth the commodities in question by the more
laborious process of production proper. From this time forward, the usual
seeking of prices for a level requires that our commodity should, like all
others which suppose an equal sacrifice of the means of production, claim
an equal value in exchange. If from any peculiar causes, the production of
this commodity is not at all possible, or if it is capable of no great
extension, its price, which would under the circumstances, be limited only
by the purchasing power of the buyer, might attain the utmost extreme
reached in prices under the spur of vanity or of the mere love of the
commodity itself. The latter is true especially in the case of
venison;(794) the former, in the case of the tame cattle,(795) fresh-water
fish,(796) and wood.(797)(798)



                             Section CXXXII.


History Of The Prices Of The Chief Wants Of Life. (Continued.)


B. The rise in prices is observed earliest in that class of goods in
question which by reason of their small volume and their comparatively
great value, and by reason of the greater capacity to be kept in a state
of preservation for a longer time, are best adapted to seeking a more
favorable market. This applies particularly to the skins, fleece, hair,
feathers, teeth, horns, etc., of animals, in which, in the breeding of
stock, etc. people in a low stage of civilization are much more apt to
speculate than in their meat. Here it is considered, and rightly so, to be
much more profitable to raise many animals which are badly cared for, than
a few, that are well cared for; for the care bestowed on animals has, as a
rule, much more influence on the body itself than on their covering.(799)
In fisheries, caviar, sturgeon-bladders, oil and whalebone;(800) and in
forest-culture, pitch, tar, potash and, to some extent, building material
etc., play the same part.(801)

Conversely, the price of those portions which are most difficult of
transportation, by reason of their volume or of the difficulty of
preserving them, rises latest. To this category belongs milk, the
production of which in a fresh state can be made an object of economic
speculation, only where civilization is at its very highest, and
especially in the vicinity of large cities.(802) It is indeed possible by
its transformation into butter or cheese to preserve milk and make it
capable of transportation. But to carry on such a business for the
purposes of trade, a care and a cleanliness are needed which are national
characteristics only of a highly civilized people (§ 229), and the
preparation of a superior quality of cheese, which is always a very long
process, is conditioned by the employment of capital long in advance of a
return, and which no poor nation is in a condition to make.(803) Cows are
primarily milk-producing animals.(804) Hence their price, as a rule, rises
later than that of oxen, but, in the higher stages of civilization, it
rises much more surprisingly. Something analogous is true of those
products which result from what remains after the production of other
goods or commodities. As long as this alone supplies the demand, the cost
of production of the former commodity is almost nothing, and hence its
price is very low. For this reason hogs are relatively cheap in two very
different periods of a people's national economy, in a very low stage of
civilization where forests are plentiful and they are fattened on acorns
and the nuts of the beech, and also when they may be considered as a
collateral product of some great industry, such as distilleries and
dairy-farming; and when raised by a numerous, especially a rural
population of small means and laborers, in order to turn to advantage, in
the former instance, the remains of production, and in the latter of
consumption.(805) Where neither of these two reasons obtains, the price of
hogs is wont to increase largely with an advance in
civilization.(806)(807)(808) (See Roscher, Nationalökonomik des
Ackerbaues, §§ 177 ff.)



                             Section CXXXIII.


History Of The Prices Of The Chief Wants Of Life. (Continued.)


C. Those raw materials which, from the very first, have been obtained by
the means of production properly so called, maintain a much greater
uniformity in price. In the lower stages of civilization, they are never
found permanently in excess; and as the economy of a people advances, the
growing dearth of natural forces may be more or less counterbalanced by
the greater cheapness of capital and labor. This is true, especially of
wheat. (See § 129, and Roscher, Nationalökonomik des Ackerbaues, p.
43.)(809)

D. In the case also of those raw materials which are objects of
occupation, and never of real production, as, for instance, minerals, a
progressive public economy, by altering the different elements of price in
an opposite direction, may leave their price on the whole unchanged. Here,
indeed, the discovery of new and especially of rich natural stores may
exert an incalculable influence; but such "accidents" underlie the laws of
human development only to the extent that those ages which are
intellectually most active are those also which are most industrious and
fortunate in the discovery of their natural resources.(810)



                             Section CXXXIV.


History Of The Prices Of The Chief Wants Of Life. (Continued.)


E. The products of industry become cheaper and cheaper as economic culture
advances; whereas, for instance, in England, towards the end of the middle
ages, a single shirt was considered of importance enough to be made not
unfrequently an object of testamentary bequest.(811) And, indeed, the
price of industrial products sinks lower the more important the part
played in their production by capital and the division of labor is as
compared with the part played by the raw material.(812) On this account,
in recent times, fine cloths have grown, relatively speaking, much cheaper
than coarse ones.(813) Lead, which during the middle ages in England was
much cheaper than iron, because of the difficulty of mining the latter,
has become much dearer in our days.(814) Conversely, where raw material
plays the most important part in manufactures, the price of the
manufactured article may increase with an advance in civilization. Hence,
articles made of wood are procured at the cheapest rates in mountainous
countries, where the division of labor is not carried very far, but where
the raw material is cheap.(815)

F. But the price of commodities decreases, especially in the higher stages
of civilization, to the extent that it is dependent on commerce.(816) Here
capital and human labor almost exclusively are effective, and the modern
improvements of communication, legal security and competition are
especially striking.(817)

G. Since personal services are, as a rule, performed and received only by
individuals, the principle in accordance with which labor in general
becomes cheaper in the higher stages of civilization, does not apply to
them to any great extent.(818) Yet we may claim that advancing
civilization has pretty universally a twofold influence on the price paid
for personal services. In the first place, freedom of competition, with
the more accurate and equitable determination of price which it produces
(in contradistinction to servitude, privilege and custom) always tends to
obtain the upper hand; and further, by the growing combination of labor
and of use (§§ 56, ff. 207), a better and better and more clearly defined
gradation between ordinary services and those of a higher order is
effected. When the latter cannot be increased at pleasure, the price paid
for them may, as the wealth of consumers increases, become, from motives
of vanity or of custom (_Gebrauchsgründen_), almost unlimited. The dancing
maid, to whom Herod (Mark, 6, 23) promised even the half of his kingdom,
is both in a politico-economical and in a moral sense a warning example to
over-refined nations.(819)



                              Section CXXXV.


History Of The Values Of The Precious Metals.--In Antiquity And In The
Middle Ages.


It is impossible to write a real history of the values of the precious
metals in ancient and medieval times: the sources of information are too
few. But it does seem possible to suggest some fragments and something of
the development of that history,(820) at least in outline.

Thus, for instance, the supply of the precious metals furnished by the
mines, in the earlier times of ancient history, was kept from entering the
market by the system which then prevailed everywhere, of hoarding treasure
by the state, by the temples etc., and later by great reserves of treasure
kept by individuals.(821) The revolutions in prices in ancient times were
produced as frequently by the sudden opening of such reservoirs, as by the
discovery of richer sources. Thus, for instance, such events as the
dissipation of Pericles' treasures, the subsidies of the Persian kings,
the spoliation of many temples in consequence of declining religiousness,
the distribution of Persian treasures by Alexander the Great,(822) had a
vast influence on the undeniable rise in the price of Greek commodities in
the century succeeding the Peleponnesian war.(823) Later, it is said that
in Rome, the price of pieces of land was doubled by the influx of Egyptian
war-booty.(824) It is a remarkable proof of the undeveloped condition of
trade in the earlier periods of ancient history, that the perturbations in
prices were, apparently, at least, so entirely local. Phoenicia, Palestine
etc., must have experienced, in the age of Solomon, a formal deluge of the
precious metals, while Greece, for instance, was then, and for centuries
after, extremely poor in them.(825) It is not, on the whole, to be
doubted, that the value in exchange of the precious metals was on a
continual decline until the most flourishing time of the Roman
emperors.(826) During the middle ages, it seems to have stood much higher
again; because the great loss of treasure caused by the migration of
nations etc., the almost complete cessation of production at the mines,
and the slowness of the circulation of money, played a much more important
part than the decrease of trade.(827)(828)



                             Section CXXXVI.


Effect On The Discovery Of American Mines Etc. On The Value Of The
Precious Metals.


The discovery of America influenced the market of the precious metals less
by the peculiar wealth of the mines in that part of the world than by
their almost incredible number.(829) The sources of wealth that the
conquistadores first lighted upon were, however, much over-estimated.(830)
The production of the American mines first assumed great importance after
the discovery of Potosi, in 1545, which was soon followed by the working
of the American mines at Guanaxuato. (1558.) Coincident with this was the
extraordinary "chance" of Medina's invention, in 1557; by means of which,
it became possible to separate silver from foreign elements by the cool
process of amalgamation, instead of melting it as had hitherto been done;
an invention all the more important in America, for the reason that in
that country, where there is so much rich ore, there is scarcely any fuel,
in the neighborhood(831) of where it is found. During the first hundred
years the mines of Peru occupied the most prominent place; whereas they
were afterwards completely overshadowed by the Mexican.(832) According to
Humboldt,(833) the annual export of gold and silver from America to
Europe, between 1492 and 1500, amounted to 250,000 piasters; between 1500
and 1545, to 3,000,000;(834) from that time to 1600, to 11,000,000; in the
seventeenth century, to about 16,000,000; during the first half the
eighteenth century to 22,500,000; during the second half, to 35,300,000.

The production of gold in Brazil began to be important after the
commencement of the eighteenth century,(835) and the working of the
Mexican silver mines of Valencia, Biscaina etc. from the middle of the
same century. In the beginning of the nineteenth century, Mexico produced,
annually, 537,512 kilogrammes of silver, and 1,609 kilogrammes of gold;
Peru, 140,078 and 782 of silver and gold respectively; Buenos Ayres,
110,764 and 506; Chili, 6,827 and 2,807; New Granada, 4,714 kilogrammes of
gold; Brazil, 3,700 kilogrammes of gold; the whole of America together,
795,581 kilogrammes of silver and 14,018 kilogrammes of gold, worth about
60,750,000 thalers.(836) During the uprisings between 1810 and 1825, which
separated Spanish America from the mother country, the production of the
mines diminished as surprisingly as it had increased in the previous
generation by reason of the greater liberality of Spanish colonial
policy.(837) Since that time, a certain increase has, indeed, been
noticed, which, however, had not immediately before the discovery of the
gold mines of California by any means attained the height reached in 1808,
but only an annual production of 701,570 kilogrammes of silver, and of
15,215 kilogrammes of gold, with an aggregate value of more than
56,000,000 thalers.(838)

In Europe, also, the obtaining of the precious metals during the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries took a great stride, especially in Germany;(839)
but, on the other hand, the Spanish gold and silver mines were closed in
1535 by a law. In the seventeenth century, there was another lull,
followed, at the end of the eighteenth, by a second period of activity
which has not yet closed. The great development of the production of gold
in the Ural mines since 1819, and in the Altai mines since 1829,(840) the
revival of the production of silver in the old Spanish mines since
1835,(841) and Pattinson's discovery, by means of which the poorest lead
ores containing silver may be refined, are here of great importance.(842)
Shortly before 1848, it was estimated that all the mines of the old world
produced annually about 274,000 kilogrammes of silver, and 56,000
kilogrammes of gold, with an aggregate value of over 69,000,000
thalers.(843)(844)



                             Section CXXXVII.


Revolution In Prices At The Beginning Of Modern History.


The mere discovery of new and richer mines need not, of itself, lower the
price of the precious metals. Their price depends on their cost of
production; and it may be very much increased, even under the most
favorable natural conditions, by the unskillfulness of labor, the dearness
of the means of subsistence, of machinery and of auxiliary substances, by
insecurity to property or to the person; by war, oppressive taxes(845)
etc. The new mines can produce a decline in the price of the precious
metals only to the extent that, for the same amount of capital and labor
expended, they, spite of all such deductions, produce a greater
result.(846)

I opine that the price of metallic money, since the discovery of America,
has diminished until the present time in the ratio of from three to four
to one.(847) The prices of wheat in France, from 1800 to 1850, were about
seven times as great as in the second half of the fifteenth century; and
in England about six times as great. But, it is not to be overlooked here,
how wheat may have grown dearer in itself (_an sich_) and how gold
declined considerably less than silver. True, this decline of the precious
metals was not an entirely steady one. We meet at the beginning of the
modern era with a real revolution in prices. The prices of rye, in lower
Saxony, from 1525 to 1550, were twice as high as from 1475 to 1500.
According to Garnier, the French prices of wheat, from 1450 to 1500, were,
on an average, 408 francs of the present time per _setier_; from 1501 to
1520, 5 francs; from 1522 to 1540, 11.26 francs; from 1541 to 1560, 11.69
francs; from 1561 to 1580, 21.33 francs; from 1581 to 1600, 32.51 francs;
during the first half of the seventeenth century, 22.77 francs; in the
second half, 26.83 francs; from 1701 to 1750, 19.64 francs. Similarly in
England, where wheat cost, from 1560 to 1600, 2.64 times as much as from
1450 to 1500.(848)

Now, the increased production of the mines cannot be the only cause of
this great perturbation in prices. It commenced, in most countries, at a
time when the supplies from America were still too small to account for
such an effect. One of the chief causes of the phenomenon was, that
precisely at this period, there was in so many nations a transition from a
sluggish circulation of money, made still more sluggish by the custom
which everywhere prevailed of hoarding treasure, to a rapid circulation,
which was made still more rapid by the use of all kinds of substitutes for
money. (§ 123).(849) In the earliest ripe fruit of European civilization
(Italy), this transition had long been accomplished; and, on that account,
the value in exchange of the precious metals was there, for a long time
previous, comparatively low.(850)

From the second third of the seventeenth century, the value of the medium
of circulation seems, on the whole, to have remained stationary.(851)
Tooke seeks to demonstrate the steady decline of the value of money until
late in the eighteenth century, from the fact that the wages of labor
increased during that time; but I should rather connect the latter
phenomenon with the simultaneous elevation of the classes engaged in
manual labor. And so Adam Smith infers a rise in the price of money after
the beginning of the eighteenth century, from the prices of wheat;(852)
but it would be better to consider the cause of this to be the unusually
long series of good crops.(853) An equally unusually long series of bad
harvests, during the second half of the century, accounts satisfactorily
for the simultaneous rise of the medium prices of corn. The great war
which lasted from 1793 to 1815, too, according to a very prevalent
opinion, must have caused the value of money to decline; a fact which is
generally accredited to the increase of paper money in so many states.

Every great war may very easily have for effect to slacken the speed of
the circulation of money, to promote the hoarding and even the burial of
treasure for a rainy day, and to paralyze credit and its power to supply
the place of money. Hence, it seems preferable to seek for the cause of
the variations in price, during the great war, in the commodities
themselves whose price was affected; since their production must have been
enormously disturbed. It rendered the brawniest men and the most powerful
horses unproductive, and even employed them as agents of destruction. It
interrupted trade in a thousand ways, or drove it into unnatural channels,
and turned the intellectual interests of nations into every direction save
that of economic industry. To this must be added the absence of security
everywhere.(854)

The cessation of these restrictions upon production, in consequence of the
restoration of peace throughout the world and the great progress
afterwards made in almost all branches of industry, explain why, from 1818
to 1848, the precious metals have apparently stood higher than during the
period immediately preceding.(855)(856)



                            Section CXXXVIII.


Revolution In Prices.--Influence Of The Non-Monetary Use Of Gold And
Silver.


To understand why so great an increase in the production of the precious
metals produced so small a decline of their value in exchange, we must
turn our attention to the other and further uses of gold and silver. The
amount devoted to these uses can never be very accurately determined,
since governmental stamping of every new gold or silver article would
afford no evidence as to the number of such articles manufactured out of
old articles etc.(857) Certain it is, however, that the aggregate amount
of gold and silver thus employed, increases with the increase of luxury
and wealth among modern nations, and that a quantity of the precious
metals thus used, especially when used for purposes of gilding for
instance, is irrestorably lost.(858) In addition to this, there is the
wear and tear of coin in circulation, which is naturally greater in the
case of large pieces than of small, and, therefore, in the case of silver
than of gold. There is, further, the damage caused by the loss of coin in
conflagrations and shipwrecks, and that occasioned by buried and forgotten
treasure.(859)

But, lastly, the principal cause consists in the powerful increase of the
demand for money, which, during the last two centuries, the great impulse
given to the rapidity of circulation, and the great increase in the
substitutes for money, have scarcely been able to outweigh. Besides the
great growth of population and of wealth, at least in Europe and the new
world, I need call attention only to the immense advance made in the
division of labor, and to the transition from trade by barter to trade
through the instrumentality of money. The entire war and merchant marine
of England, about 1602, had, according to Anderson, a capacity of only
45,000 tons,--that is, not one-fifth of what the small city of Bremen has
now; a capacity which at the close of the year 1873 amounted to 237,206
tons--while in 1872 its merchant marine alone had a capacity of 7,213,000
tons. The aggregate foreign trade of England, France, Russia and the
United States, in 1750, amounted to about 260,000,000 thalers; in 1864, it
was over 5,400,000,000, and between 1871 and 1872, in one year, over
9,000,000,000 thalers. Nor should it be forgotten that Europe's trade with
the East, since the beginning of the sixteenth century, increased
immensely. This, at present, produces uniformly a very "unfavorable
balance" for Europe, which can be made up for only by very large shipments
of silver to foreign parts.(860) If China and India were suddenly to draw
on us for other commodities instead of gold and silver, the result would
be a great revolution in prices in Europe.



                             Section CXXXIX.


History Of Prices.--Californian And Australian Discoveries.


Tengoborski is of opinion, that the flow of gold from Siberia alone would
have been absorbed by the ever-increasing want of civilized nations of
money; but that the coincident discoveries in California and Australia, in
September 1847, and February 1851, must sooner or later produce a
revolution in prices. And, indeed, the fecundity of these countries is
unparalleled. North America, which in 1846 produced only 3,600 pounds of
gold, according to Soetbeer, produced in the years from 1849 to 1863,
respectively, 118,000, 148,000, 178,000, 195,000, 180,000, 165,000,
165,000, 165,000, 160,000, 145,000, 125,000, 120,000, 115,000 and 110,000.
Austria produced in the years from 1851 to 1863 respectively, 27,000,
196,000, 250,000, 160,000, 170,000, 195,000, 180,000, 175,000, 160,000,
150,000, 160,000, 160,000, 170,000, pounds of gold.

From 1864 to 1867, the aggregate production of gold in the world was,
according to the last mentioned authority, a yearly average of 188.4
millions of thalers, and of silver, 94.8 millions. In Europe, Russia not
included, the production was, in 1863, 3,960 pounds of gold and 405,000
pounds of silver; in the Russian Empire, 46,500 pounds of gold and 40,000
of silver; in Mexico 12,000 pounds of gold and 1,250,000 pounds of silver;
in South and Central America, 12,500 pounds of gold and 520,000 pounds of
silver; in Africa, India and Lesser Asia, 30,000 pounds of gold and 40,000
pounds of silver--a total of 384,000 pounds of gold, and 2,905,000 pounds
of silver. F.X. Neumann(861)(862) estimates that the whole world produced,
in the years 1868-1870, annually, 192.8 million thalers of gold, and 94
million thalers of silver; and in 1873, of both metals, 291 million
thalers.

The question, whether in this second half of the nineteenth century, we
are to have a revolution in prices similar to that which took place in the
sixteenth century can be answered only hypothetically. The gold diggings
now most productive will, probably, as we may judge from analogous cases
in the past, be soon exhausted.(863) But it is entirely possible that, for
a long series of years, other diggings will be found equally rich. It is
almost certain that the restless activity of the English and of North
Americans will not cease until they have exhausted the favors of
nature.(864) Every improvement in agriculture, in the means of
communication, and in the public security of the gold lands, makes the
cost of production smaller. There are doubtless in other countries a great
many _placers_ which need only to be touched with the finger of European
civilization to produce gold in abundance.(865) It would, indeed, be
necessary that this same civilization should make these same countries
better markets for the precious metals by increasing their demand.

So far as silver is concerned, there can be no question that America
possesses mines unlimited in extent, and, as yet, almost untouched. "The
time will come," says Duport,(866) "a century sooner or later, when the
production of silver will have no other limits than those put to it by the
continual decline in the price of silver." There seems, also, to be no
lack of quicksilver, especially in California; and the cost of its
production hitherto may be lessened very much by the labor of better
workmen, machines and means of transportation.(867) All this supposes
great progress of the mining countries in civilization in general; and
yet, thus far, Mexico's republican independence etc., as compared with the
later years of the Spanish colonial system there, is a great
retrogression. The conquest of Spanish America by the United States would
give a vast impetus to economic improvement; and here, again, the increase
of production would be attended by an increased demand.

But especially must the demand for the precious metals, which naturally
increases with the wealth, commerce and luxury of nations, constitute a
decisive element in answering our question. Nothing, for instance, were a
reduction in prices impending, would promote it so much as a series of
devastating wars or revolutions in Europe. Moreover, it should not be
forgotten, that the money market is now almost commensurable with the
world, and will soon embrace it within its limits; and that market
embraces not only the precious metals but the numberless representatives
of money and media of credit. The basin, therefore, to which the gold and
silver streams of the world are tributary is immeasurably greater than it
was in the sixteenth century; its level cannot be changed as readily, and
an equal addition made every year to its previous contents can increase it
only by a small amount.(868) Nor could a considerable decline of the value
of the precious metals be readily produced without making the circulation
of money slower, and the employment of means of credit relatively less
frequent, in consequence of which, the further decline would, to a certain
extent, be arrested.(869) In the case of other commodities a decline of
prices leads only probably to an absolutely greater demand; in the case of
money, it leads to a demand necessarily greater. That the money market in
our days can stand pretty rude shocks is evident from the fact, among
others, that the price of gold is so high as compared with that of
silver.(870)(871)



                               Section CXL.


Revolution In Prices.--Its Influence On The National Resources.


The ulterior consequences of such a revolution in prices would contribute
to the real wealth of a people only in the sense that they would place
such a people in a way, with less sacrifice, to employ the precious metals
on a large scale in ministering to the luxuries of life. This small
advantage itself would be counterbalanced by the depreciation of the
metallic stock, and especially by the necessity of henceforth devoting a
larger quantity of gold and silver to the purposes of circulation.(872)
But such a revolution would produce a sudden reverse in the distribution
of a nation's wealth among its constituent members. All those who, by
virtue of contracts antecedently made, have payments to effect, are
benefited to the extent of the difference between the old and the actual
price, while those who are to receive such payments lose to the same
extent.(873) Therefore, those engaged in industrial enterprises improve
their condition, because they immediately increase(874) the prices of
their own productions; and, for a time at least, continue the use of
capital borrowed from others, of land leased or rented etc. at the old
prices.(875)

Besides, at the beginning, and before a corresponding depreciation of its
value has taken place, an increase of money produces as a rule a low rate
of interest (§ 185), and an itch to buy on the part of the public. All
this may serve as a powerful stimulant to production on a large
scale.(876) Those most certain to suffer loss are officials(877) with a
fixed salary, and so-called annuitants, creditors of the nation and of
individuals. Even bankers, too, have no means to fix the value of their
wares which they see disappearing, so to speak under their eyes.(878) Of
land owners, those who are in debt gain, that is especially the poorer,
and the more speculative among them.(879) On the other hand, owners of
large estates who have alienated their tithe-rights, or right to
vassal-service etc. for capital, or for fixed sums to be paid at regular
intervals, that is, in a great many places the great mass of the nobility,
undergo a not insignificant social fall.

The condition of those who earned a living by manual labor no doubt
deteriorated in the sixteenth century, as may be inferred from the
extraordinary activity of public charity in that period.

Between 1500 and 1550, silver purchased, in Orleans, from 4.1 to 4.5 times
as much common labor as it does now, while silver, as compared with the
average price of twenty-seven commodities, has grown cheaper in the ratio
of only from 2.6 to 2.7:1. (_Mantellier._) It was impossible for this
class to raise the price of their wares as rapidly as that of the medium
of circulation declined, because they could not wait, nor hold back their
commodity even for a moment. (§ 164.)(880) This would, indeed, be very
different in our day. Wages, because of the facilities, both physical and
moral, which have everywhere been placed in the way of emigration, were
necessarily one of these articles which rose soonest in price, as compared
with money.(881) Lastly, the state itself profits by the diminished
thing-value, that is, real value of its public debt;(882) but it loses, at
the same time, on all taxes, duties etc., which are not estimated at a
certain percentage of the value of the articles taxed.(883) As a rule,
therefore, it would need to impose new taxes. Now, the parliamentary right
to impose taxes, however extensive it may juridically be, is, ordinarily,
of great importance in practice only when there is question of increasing
the existing burthen. Hence, this right, wherever it exists, is brought
into the utmost activity by a revolution in prices.(884)(885)

However, the new additions of gold and silver to the already existing
supply may not immediately produce a corresponding depreciation of the
value of the precious metals. If the first receivers of the additional
supply of money exchange it rapidly for other goods, it will probably
bring them the former value in exchange of the metal. Not until it has
passed into a third or fourth person's hands is the depreciation apt to be
perceptible. It is, therefore, in this case, a great advantage to be the
first hand. The world-threatening power of Spain, in the seventeenth
century, was very essentially promoted by the American gold and silver
mines;(886) nor is it a matter of less significance to-day, that the great
mineral wealth of the world belongs to Siberia, California and Australia;
that is, especially to Russia and to countries colonized by Great Britain.
Further, as to the classes into which a nation is divided, it was only the
crown, the Church and a comparatively small number of officials, soldiers
and officers who controlled Spanish America;(887) and who can tell how the
absolute monarchy of Spain was strengthened by this fact? In the
seventeenth century, on the other hand, it is principally manufacturers
and merchants, and more especially yet, workmen, who reap the immediate
advantages of new discoveries of gold.



                              Section CXLI.


Effect Of An Enhancement Of The Price Of The Precious Metals.


A great enhancement of the precious metals would naturally and necessarily
produce a revolution in prices in a direction(888) opposite to the one
just described, and one which would be much more injurious to a nation's
economy. Such a revolution would weigh most heavily on the most sensitive,
and the momentarily most productive classes of the people, inasmuch as the
price of the ready product as compared with advances made for the purposes
of production would be a declining one; and it would benefit those classes
who live in leisure on the fruits of previous labor. There would, at the
same time, be a perceptible growth of consumption in certain departments,
useful, no doubt, in themselves, but apt to degenerate into excess, and
which are, therefore, most easily cared for. (§ 212, seq.) To this extent,
the gold discoveries of the nineteenth century, without which an
enhancement of the price of money would undoubtedly have taken place, have
warded off a great economic malady from the nations. Moreover, this
inverted revolution in prices may be moderated by governmental measures,
such as a diminution of taxes, emissions of paper money etc.(889)



                              Section CXLII.


The Price Of Gold As Compared With That Of Silver.


The price of gold as compared with that of silver does not, by any means,
depend entirely on the ratio of the quantities of the two to each other.
Rather is it, in the long run, determined by the average cost of
production necessary at those gold and silver mines which exist under the
most disadvantageous conditions, but which it is still necessary to work
in order to satisfy the aggregate requirement of these metals. On the
whole, with an advance of economic civilization, the dearness of gold as
compared with that of silver has been enhanced. The former, in the middle
ages, was worth from ten to twelve times as much as the latter,(890) while
now it is worth from fifteen to almost sixteen times as much.(891) In the
same period of time, also, gold in highly civilized countries is wont to
be comparatively dearer.(892)

These facts are explained as well by the demand as by the supply. As the
production of gold requires so little skill or capital, and that of silver
so much of both, the former may be considered a natural product to a
greater extent than the latter, and therefore, the rule laid down in § 130
is applicable to it. (_Senior._) Besides, in the higher stages of
civilization, especially when the precious metals are cheap, larger
payments are usual, to the making of which, gold is certainly best
adapted; just as in every day trade merchants are wont to accept a gold
piece in payment, even at something of a premium, while the peasantry
hesitate to do so.(893)

It is very much of a question whether gold or silver is, on the whole,
subject to greater variations in price. The fact that gold is more
strictly a natural product would of itself constitute a powerful element
of variation. (§ 112). But, on the other hand, its greater durability and
the greater care bestowed on its preservation, have for effect to make the
existing quantity preponderate in importance over its annual increase. The
demand for gold varies more suddenly than the demand for silver. In case
of war or sedition, the former is more easily carried away or hidden. It
is also more desirable for the state for its military fund. On the other
hand, on account of its greater capacity for transportation, it may follow
such claims when made on it, more easily, from country to country. On the
whole, I am inclined to think that, for short periods of time, silver
maintains its value better, and gold for longer ones.(894)



                             Section CXLIII.


The Price Of Gold As Compared With That Of Silver. (Continued.)


If the gold-production of California should be attended(895) by a notable
depression of the value of that metal, it becomes a question whether or
not silver would be necessarily depreciated with it. Senior claims that it
would not, for the reason that the two precious metals do not, for most
purposes, act as substitutes each of the other. If a country needed 1,000
pounds of gold and 15,000 pounds of silver as money,(896) and these two
sums of metal were equal in value, an increase of gold by one-half, which
would depreciate its price in relation to silver to 10:1, would not
overflow the channels of circulation. The 1,500 pounds of gold are now
also equal to only 15,000 pounds of silver, and _vice versa_.

I would put very important limitations to this assertion. Even a moderate
depreciation of gold would drive out the silver from all those countries
which had a mixed coinage made up of the two metals; and hence the supply
of silver would be increased in the other countries. And so it is quite
possible, up to a certain point, that the larger silver coin should be
replaced by small gold ones, ten and five franc pieces etc. Rau is
certainly right in his surmise that a general rise in the price of
commodities as compared with coin, the result of a great increase of gold,
would go farthest in countries in which the gold is the medium of
circulation, begin later in those which had a mixed circulation, and
continue for the the shortest time in those countries which, by force of
law, had a silver circulation only.(897)(898)